# Chair Group Meeting

### Agenda

- Retrospective from last meeting
  - Choose next meeting moderator (David) ✅
- Review and share tasks related to chair group management
  - Manage MFWG mail list
  - Agenda for Chair Group meetings
- Define next meeting agenda
- Review Backlog and open issues
- Plan for design principles
- Round of presentations
  - David(XLIFF) [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MZwkBUnp4hhbGVoWtJ_e1QCIRp07m7DZ5617G8AkfVg/edit?usp=sharing)
  - George (SIRI)
  - Mihai - [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/19US44GNyPRn_oOTTrQHX2frSvm-7XQsTYTpqRPEWtdU/edit#slide=id.g1f2f46a3ff_0_140)
- More sync channel for message format ✅
- Review [icu4x](https://github.com/unicode-org/icu4x) ✅

### Actions

Concrete message format use case #93

- Selectors and Placeholders(Number Format) using the [example](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/c23e1bcba06b2a34d6f077d93d3dab213bc76d33/exploration/variants.md)
  - How to serialize data model ?
  - Use cases of data model used by different implementations([Slides with examples](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1RujNFCq3gH9TUEKDB_uFdKWNG1A1j2_NBCdnTmnEqv0/edit?usp=sharing))?

### Actions for August Meeting

- Work in presentation to fit both in 20-25 minutes timebox

## Decisions

- Elango shared information about icu4x project ✅
- More sync channel for message format, we decide to use the unicode slack (Channel is already working) ✅
- Round of presentations David & Mihai ✅

### Interesting info

- [i18n Namespace](https://w3c.github.io/json-ld-syntax/#the-i18n-namespace)

### Next Meeting Agenda 2020-07-20:

- Chair Group Status
- POC's progress overview
- Zibi's Experimental AST Overview
