# 25 March 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)

Scribe: TIM

## Topic: Getting to Done

Key dates:
28 February: CLDR-TC approval (milestone 45-alpha)
13 March: last ICU check-in
27 March: last specification change (milestone 45-beta)
10 April: CLDR release (milestone ldml-45)

EAO: Should start making docs more user-friendly. Not enough showing what this thing really is and what you can do with it. I’ve needed to dig into past meeting notes or design docs for using examples so I don’t need to come up with them myself. We should work on this

APP: No need to wait on that. Happy to make a link-catching document for presentations

EAO: I can share slides from the two meetup presentations I did, but talks didn’t get recorded

APP: Would be excited if people make recorded things to post them on the Unicode YouTube channel

## Topic: PR Review
Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.

|  PR  |                                    Description                                    |          Recommendation         |
|:----:|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:-------------------------------:|
| #745 | A few proposed tweaks…                                                            | Discuss                         |
| #744 | Fix design doc                                                                    | Merge                           |
| #743 | Collapse all escapes                                                              | Future?                         |
| #741 | Define non-negative integer option                                                | Discuss                         |
| #740 | Remove tests…                                                                     | Close                           |
| #731 | Disallow whitespace as the first character of reserved-body in reserved-statement | Merge, update text PR to follow |
| #728 | Add "resolved values" section to formatting                                       | Discuss                         |
| #719 | Remove references to "RangeError" in tests                                        | Merge                           |
| #704 | Address #703: make syntax/data model fallback clear                               | LDML46                          |
| #673 | Fix whitespace conformance to match UAX31                                         | Discuss                         |
| #646 | Update spec as if PR #645 were accepted                                           | LDML46                          |

#728 - Add “resolved values” to formatting

APP: People said they would take a look last week. Tim took a look. Do we want to put this in?

TIM: I think there should be a design doc

APP: Would it help? (During the tech preview period)

EAO: It’s an attempt to take a step in a better direction and not introduce anything normative and new; just give a more concrete example of what a resolved value looks like, per current spec language. A lot of the thinking on “resolved value” is coming out of my head, so I’m a bit biased.

APP: Anyone else have an opinion? (no one) So let’s sit on it. We don’t have a consensus, and we know we need to work on it; let’s make it a first order of business during tech preview, along with related issues. Anyone object?

#731 - Disallow whitespace as first character of reserved-body

APP: Tim, you had a comment about adding text to the spec. Can it be a separate PR?

TIM: OK as long as there’s a separate issue

APP: I will create the issue. Any objection to merging?

#740 - Remove test

APP: OK to not merge?

TIM: yes

MRR: On tests, I was curious as to what I should be moving into conformance test repo. I’m planning to take everything out of message-format-wg and move it over. Is that in line with what others expect?

APP: I think so. We have expressed a desire to rationalize the naming of the errors. That could be done later. Are you setting it up so any changes we make to the tests in our repo will be automated.

MRR: Currently low-effort manual. I’m happy to keep it in sync. Might be able to automate it.

EAO: Just wanted to check, are we OK keeping the source of truth for the test data still in the current repo? (yes) Then anything goes

#737 acknowledgments section

APP: No one has asked to be added. No one’s asked for their name to be changed that I haven’t already changed. I will be maintaining this going forward. Any objection? (none)

#741 - Define non-negative integer option

EAO: Did I give an approval?

APP: Yes. STA, you and Tim had some comments left

STA: I made two comments and I think one is unresolved. Might be a follow-up issue. I was curious about whether we want to specify the error behavior in case the value passed is not positive. We enforce it on the syntax level for literals –

APP: This is not syntax; internal to the :number functions. Inside registry.md we’re saying “I am a number function and only accept these kinds of values.” Registry saying “these are the things I’ll accept.”

EAO: On a meta-level, I’d echo what I think you just said: we do not currently have any selection or formatting errors individually identified, but we could. Through that exercise, we could maybe also indicate whether something like a bad input type of an error is supposed to be a formatting or selection error, or whether it’s a resolution error. It could theoretically be kind of both or either, haven’t considered explicitly. Could return to it post-45

APP: We have considered that, and we have an operand mismatch error as a sub-error of Invalid Expression, and that is a resolution error. We did have that discussion for operand matching.

EAO: But not for options

APP: Not for options, which I assume would be an resolution error, because it happens inside of the function, not in MessageFormat

MIH: EAO proposed to keep this after 45. I want to suggest that everything we do is after 45; otherwise we land things in ICU that are not going to be by the spec for 45. We are kind of late to do 45 stuff now. We can fine-tune things like contributors, but for semantics, it’s a bit late. Other than that, I’m fine with the change as proposed. I would fine-tune the lingo a bit. A value that can be coerced into a number – that’s JS terminology. Making a number from a string is parsing, not coercion. It’s more precise and I think it’s more PL-agnostic. 

APP: Doesn’t say coerced, it says evaluates. I chose that to avoid saying exactly what happens. If your impl thinks it’s a number, then it’s a number.

STA: I misspoke about the syntax. What I observe is that we don’t use the MUST verb a lot in registry.md, and when we do, it’s about the requirements we impose on implementors. Here, it’s a requirement we impose on users, which is what I think is interesting. I found one more place we do it, in :datetime; we say if both style and field options are specified, an “invalid expression” must be emitted. Could be appropriate to say something similar here. A literal MUST match the following regex; if it doesn’t, emit this error. That’s what I miss; information about what to emit in case the requirement isn’t met.

APP: It does not currently say what to emit. It says what you must accept. If it’s a literal, it has to look like this…

STA: But we don’t control what people will pass in

APP: We say what you must accept as a number, so implementations know what that is. If they accept more than that, then it’s on them. Then we say what the value space is 

STA: We say: when the value is a literal, it must match the regex – it doesn’t say you can accept more stuff.

APP: And that’s reportability. We don’t want people to write all sorts of different values. 

STA: I think it would be helpful to specify the expected behavior in case the user-inputted data doesn’t match these expectations. I would be prefer if we were explicit about erroring out.

EAO: As a thought, if we’re defining a lower bound for what must be accepted as an integer, and values not matching this may also be accepted – that’s what we’re doing, right?

APP: No, we’re defining a non-negative integer

EAO: OK, and we’re saying other expressions could also be expected for that, and an impl is not expected to emit an error for all other values. Then we could limit the number to be a 1- or 2-digit number. We don’t need anything bigger than 99.

STA: Maybe I’m misunderstanding; the current text says if it’s a literal, it must match the following ABNF, so function implementations can’t accept -1.

APP: EAO’s making a different suggestion, which is to allow 1 or 2 digits, because 100 doesn’t make sense for these options. This is really about the internals of number and integer, and controls how many digits can be used in any case. It doesn’t control anything else. Other functions could define non-negative integer differently. For :number, we could save some of this. Then that particular line you’re reading in the diff is guidance to message writers.

RCH: That seems like a reasonable suggestion, but not associated with the name “non-negative integer”. We’d want to call it something else if we restrict the range.

APP: Inside the number spec?

RCH: Yes – call it a small nat or something, or even a restricted non-negative integer. But don’t use the general term for the narrow range.

APP: Digit size option

RCH: That’s really great – why even go to 99 if you don’t expect impls to support it?

APP: OK, I’ll change it to digit-size-option. I’ll add appropriate text, and say impls can make it smaller.

TIM: (coercing/parsing)

APP: I’m open to whatever verb, as long as we don’t enumerate all the possible types we’re allowing. How about something super simple, which is a digit control option is an option value that is a number between 0 and 99. Then we talk about implementations getting it from implementation-defined types or by parsing a string. I will make changes to this PR; then we will beat on it, and we need to beat on it quickly. I would appreciate that today or tomorrow. If you object to the rephrasing, say so on the PR before Wednesday or it’s not going in. Is it imperative that we put this in for everyone to be happy for 45, or should I hold the PR back?

EAO: I’m fine with whatever, as long as I continue to be able to use the same rules for a variable string value as for a literal

APP: No, we are not going to change that

#744 - Selection on numerical values

APP: Danny Gleckner made a suggestion but he hasn’t signed CLA yet. If he doesn’t, I’ll file a new PR and credit him for finding it. 

#745 - Text in syntax.md

APP: Bruno made some observations. I made a correction. I think other things look OK. Any objection?

EAO: I need to look at this one – don’t remember it

APP: It was just filed an hour ago. I’ll hold it.

EAO: I’ll take a look today and review it within a few hours.

## Topic: Issue review

Let’s close all of the issues
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3ALDML45

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues
Currently we have 53 open (was 50 last time).
13 are Preview-Feedback
0 are resolve-candidate and proposed for close.
1 is Agenda+ and proposed for discussion.
25 are Future or LDML46
10 are LDML45

#736 - .match constructs and declarations

EAO: There’s the whole thing on .match declarations and whether they shadow names…

STA: I’m surprised that match would also declare. I thought this wasn’t the case. I thought, Addison, you said it did declare. I thought if you want consistency b/t matching and formatting, you need the input in front of the match, and match was not equivalent to input. Maybe there is something to clear up here in the spec.

APP: We have a bunch of examples in which match does declare. We did the whole discussion about requiring an annotation in order for .match to work. I believe it would be unsurprising if, lacking a declaration, an annotation in a selector produced results if you don’t have any other annotation. That makes it interesting. I also observe that it’s really easy to write multiple selectors in such a way that it hoses everything. You only have one variable name later. It’s unclear which annotation applies if .match selectors do declare. I think it’s important for us to figure out. I’m interested to know what the three implementations we have do.

EAO: The current spec language is pretty clear. The .match does not declare. It doesn’t work like a declaration. I went through how it would need to work. It only works if the function impl gets more access to the context than it should, and writes stuff in weird places. I think the current discussion here should be: what is it that we think ought to be happening. How do we document that? That’s one axis. Do we better document the current state of affairs, where .match is not a declaration? Or do we go straight into figuring out how we want to change the behavior to get the results we want? Do we have effectively, in that context, a desire to change syntax? What kinds of syntax changes will we consider?

APP: Fair observations; I think we’ve identified – if .matches declare, then we’ve identified problems. I don’t think current spec is clear enough. We have examples that need fixing if they don’t declare. An interesting question is whether we should allow to do selectors to do any annotation. 

EAO: I think you answered my first question. Brings about a need for an action point for today or tomorrow. Better language and fixes to examples, to describe a current state where match does not declare. Not going to change 45 to be such that match does a declaration.

TIM: my implementation does not introduce a shadow. There are no non-local effects. There is no spec text.

MIH: Same with the Java implementation. Selector doesn’t affect anything in the formatting side. If you want to be consistent, you use a .local or an .input. I would feel kind of not-good about forcing there to be a .local or .input for decisions. Probably it’s more of an exception than the norm. If you select on gender, it doesn’t mean declaring something to re-use everywhere. I wouldn’t put this restriction on everything just because of plural.

EAO: Two things: I can take up the action point of adding a PR with more absolute language. To what Mihai said, I agree that it’s plausible for plural selection to be a little weird. Such a vast, vast majority of all selection is on plurals. That means it’s a sizable part of the whole population of messages. This is why I was proposing in a later comment that we can change the .match syntax so it doesn’t take expressions, but instead variable references, so you would always need a .input or a .local.

STA: Not a comment for 45, but I think it’s interesting that we overlooked that, and thinking about it, it’s not a question I asked myself before. Might be a gap we want to address in 46, along the lines APP was suggesting. I’m realizing that b/c we require all selections to have an annotation, transitive or not, this suggests a .match expression with an annotation is equivalent to an .input with an annotation, then a .match. One affects formatting, but the other doesn’t. I think we need to think about that

MIH: One note about plural being special; it’s not really about plural, but about values formatted with .00 instead. It’s something ICU didn’t support for a long time. People usually don’t count things in fractions. You didn’t move 1.2 files from here to there. It’s mostly about units and currencies. You shouldn’t do selection on a currency, because you have a currency formatter. The real use case for this is rare, if you ask me. I don’t think we have an example other than “1.00 dollars” in our spec. People don’t usually do that.

APP: It’s less rare than you think

EAO: To STA, the problem with .match doing an implicit assignment of an annotation is that the annotation might be doing something entirely different than what :number or :datetime does. Might have an “isEmpty” predicate that has a true or false result, for selection. Is that going to end up formatting as true or false. The sort of transformations that are possible in values in annotations – not really accounted for in built-in functions, but possible for custom stuff. Implicit changes like that – really hard to get right, and to get to a state where people will find that predictable/comfortable. 

APP: I tried to link this back to the discussion we’ll have about inheritance. This is one of the reasons why I think that’s interesting. Functions need to describe whether they affect the value of the operand, whether the options are transitive or intransitive. This is part of that, potentially. How to make functions that are functional? All of our implementations do not declare, so I think it makes sense to rule it out in 45; come back in the tech preview and find out if people expect it to declare. We would have to describe how it works, if you add the capability.

STA: That makes sense. Should be a change we can introduce fairly safely during tech preview if we start from .match statements not declaring right now. It’s interesting to consider how this intersects with the requirement that selectors be annotated. You can do a list :empty and satisfy the requirement, but why did we introduce it in the first place? To help ensure consistency between matching and formatting. Some functions annotate for selecting purposes, but not formatting purposes. It’s something I missed – the requirements that selectors be annotated strongly suggest that .match actually d

TIM: I do think it does relate to the discussion about composability. How do we describe what functions actually do? The result of a function any. Different kinds of functions maybe people expect … 

EAO: Just thought I’d note that when we do discuss this, there are solutions that let us sidestep the problem. What I mentioned, changing .match so it only takes in variables. I started out with the possibility of using… If we can’t resolve what should really happen, there’s an alternative approach. Then we don’t need to re-discuss about mutability.

APP: I think that’s valid, but I think we should approach it in a design doc at the right time. I think it’s related to composability. We do need to tangle with “how do I write a function that affects the value”. My example has always been text-transform-uppercase. I want the string to be uppercase when I’m done with it and then I want to do another local to the uppercase value. How do I do that? I think we need to go through that exercise, work through all of that. This is a piece of it. Maybe not the most important piece. If we decide to add “declaring selector annotations”, to coin a term, then it would be one pathway; otherwise, we would need to take some of the things such as EAO’s suggestion. That’s where I’m at; I would propose we make a PR that clarifies the non-declaring status now, with minimum amount of text, then work on design.

EAO: Also wanted to say if we end up with a selector having an effect on its value, then let’s recognize that we’re on the cutting edge of PL development and the syntax used in other cases of pattern matching and so on, and let’s be sure we really want to do cutting-edge PL development in MessageFormat 2, when one of the alternatives is to not, and enforce a slightly more verbose expression that doesn’t do weird things.

MIH: I strongly agree with EAO. It’s a rare thing.

APP: Is my proposed course of action supported? Should I make the PR?

EAO: I’ll make the PR we need to land within 45 and I’ll ping you.

APP: I’ll need another approval today. Do we want to add this to the list of things we ask for feedback on?

EAO: I think we need someone to take up the bigger action, of putting together a design doc for the overall matching behavior around this. 

APP: Is this not related to composability? 

EAO: As it can be handled separately, I would wish for it to be handled separately. Putting those together makes for a huge thing again and I prefer smaller things.

TIM: I think we should ask for feedback about this. It should be in terms of a specific example, and ask “what do you think this should do?”.

APP: Yes, we don’t want to ask leading questions.

APP: I’ll take a stab at that design. I think I understand what the options are.

EAO: Yay, you need to do research into the JS pattern-matching proposal, because it’s doing similar things! Have fun.

ECH: I’m confused about pattern matching and cutting-edge PL features. Is this about the function composability thing?

APP: EAO raised that .match followed by an expression; that expression is not a declaration, but in some places, we pretend like it should affect the results of later formatting. We just said that it doesn’t. The question is, should it? 

Example:

```
.match {$num :number minFracDig=2} * {{You have {$num}}}
```

What prints for $num? The assertion is that minFracDig only affects the plural matching; doesn’t affect the formatted $num

ECH: Why would that be? I think we’ve talked about this a lot in the past. Formatting affects the plural category selection. So why would you not also add the formatting in the result…

EAO: Because values are immutable. It is possible to place MessageFormat 2 into the bigger world of PL design and esoteric PL design, and note that what we’re doing with .match and the variant selection there is a kind of pattern-matching, not a kind of switch case or other forms of selection. A number of languages support this. With different syntaxes and different behavior. What we’re doing is a little esoteric, given best-match rather than first-match. Desire for an ergonomic solution for where the match operation itself creates a value that can be used in the results. I’m not sure if this is actively supported in any programming language. The current proposals for JS pattern-matching syntax include aspects of this. What we’re doing fits into what other programming languages are considering doing. If we go down this path, we should note we’re doing novel things in PL design, in terms of changing the value during the match.

ECH: I’ve always maintained that this is not a programming language. We’re describing data that goes into an API. A lot of the effort we spend is designing the data that goes in as inputs. The behavior we would expect requires … in i18n for this number example, the formatting does affect the plural category. if our syntax doesn’t reflect that, drawing from pattern-matching features in higher-level declarative languages is one way to solve it, but I don’t think that’s a fait accompli. Other ways to think about it. We should take our time and think about what those are. If this is complicated, maybe what it means is that it’s ambiguous. Maybe we should just restrict it to be a variable. Can design things to reduce ambiguity, but we need to think about it. Maybe not related to function composability, but is important. Definitely got some puzzled looks from people who don’t attend this meeting, and they had a lot of questions. These types of things are really important to get feedback on.

APP: I think it is related to composability, and this could inform that discussion. 

EAO: I think I absolutely agree with ECH in where you end up; change syntax so we can avoid this ambiguity, so we don’t need to end up with a result where the matcher can only be compared using complicated semantics. We should not be inventing all the new things while only inventing this overall new thing. While we’re not a PL, we are a DSL where mostly we are describing data, and we have this matching operation specifically. We do need to define the algorithm for what we’re doing; the algorithms we have are already complex, so I would prefer to keep it simple and maybe a little more verbose.

APP: We should keep in mind our user base and their expectations, and do things that are clear to people. Don’t want to put my thumb on either side of the scale. I think we have an action plan – are people cool with it? Put a thing in 45 that says it’s not a declaration. I’m going to write a design doc where we discuss the options.

Data model simplifications (Various issues)

STA: I want to share an example from my 80% work – protobuf messages have no guarantees about how things get serialized. For one of our projects, we use cryptographic signatures that sign payloads; these payloads are signed by first serializing the data and then signing it. Because the data are serialized nondeterministically, the signature can be different based on what version of the binary you use. In a system I help maintain where we orchestrate a fleet of servers Google-scale, we can sometimes notice a change in config of this fleet of servers and decide to push an update to, say, a few million servers, b/c a hash changed, and we think there should be an update. I’ve been burnt by nondeterministic serialization and making decisions about whether things need to be updated or are the same because things serialize in different order, which is why, in my comments about the simplification proposals to the data model, I preferred to stay on the safe side and use sequence types like lists. That is probably more of a question of whether our data model is supposed to be used like that. MIH made the point that it’s a reference data model, it’s an ordered map and you implement it the way you want.

APP: we’re missing design doc stuff there; rather than trying to dive in and fix it all, why don’t we work through what the options are and what we want to accomplish? Play with some different alternatives before we try to nail down new text in the spec.

EAO: That reminds me that one of the parts identified by the proposals is: I don’t think we currently say that option order must not have an effect on the results. Saying that for CLDR v45 might be a good idea. I believe this is the case for all the implementations. Saying that order has no effect might have an effect on what we do later. Should I file a PR adding a sentence saying order of options doesn’t matter? Or for expression attributes.

APP: I think so.

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/syntax.md#options 

## Topic: Things to do in Tech Preview

Bidi

EAO: How will we advance the bidi discussion? It seems like the active people are a small subset of the whole group.

APP: The whitespace thing fixes trojan source problems – allows for the fixing of trojan source problems with MF messages. Separately, there’s the bidi output thing, which we already addressed.

EAO: I think the remaining thing is the syntax and constructions possible around whitespace or otherwise. My question is more the meta of this discussion. You and me and Mark? Or should we involve other people?

APP: What’s going to happen over the next week and a half is to finish off the things we’ve discussed today, tighten up the spec, make sure the HTML for LDML gets generated correctly. Then I’m going to snapshot our repo. That will be the thing that gets labeled as “tech preview”. After that, we can start working on specification, syntax and so forth, in anger, during the tech preview period. I will rebase my whitespace work as part of that. I think those changes make a lot of sense – makes it easier to understand the syntax, b/c optional and non-optional whitespace become visible as such more clearly. I would expect that as a group we’d review that work as we’ve reviewed other syntax changes. 

MIH: I commented on this, and I don’t think we should treat it as a super-special thing different from other syntax changes. I don’t think it’s very useful; if I want to sneak in something abusing directionality and I want to do a PR, I just won’t put the control characters in there. I think it’s a normal syntax change that we can all review.

APP: Doesn’t prevent abuse, but allows the impl to fix things to be non-abusive. If you just did FSI PDIs around all the optional blocks. Then your trojan source attack goes away.

MIH: Can do a pretty-printer or something

APP: It would give people the ability to do something, make it easier for tools. It’ll also make optional vs. non-optional whitespace visible in the syntax.

EAO: I don’t get that concern. Isn’t it already, with s or [s]? How do the changes considered here make it more visible?

APP: I think it makes it more self-documenting. It’s certainly a discussion we had with Bruno. Would be easier if it said “optional whitespace”.

EAO: I find it easier to read with the brackets, b/c it’s built into the ABNF syntax

APP: True, though I observe that abbreviations are common in RFCs. To your point, MIH, EAO’s observation is not that we’re trying to exclude people, but we wish more people would pay closer attention to these evil things we’re doing.

MIH: It’s an open issue and PR, you can’t force people to contribute or exclude them from contributing. It’s like any other.

EAO: On the meta-level, the changes I think should be made to our approach is that we can be more strict and clear about what’s allowed/expected/supported where, so we end up with a stronger result when pretty-printing or otherwise processing a message. We can start considering that in that PR… is there a design doc for this?

APP: I don’t think so

EAO: I don’t think so – this might need a design doc, actually. We ought to have a place to discuss/describe why we’re doing whatever we end up doing. 

APP: I think it’s pretty simple – RTL translator people’s lives will be miserable because we use all these sigils that are neutrals. They will not thank us for everything getting swappy. If we allow bidi controls in the right places, tools can help them out.

## Topic: AOB?


