14 February 2024 | MessageFormat Working Virtual Face-to-Face

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Mark Davis - Google (MED)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Shane Carr - Google (SFC)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)
- Simon Clark (SCA)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)

Scribe: ECH, MIH


## Topic: Action Item Review

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3AAction-Item

APP : Asking for feedback for attributes

EAO : 641 =>  Add tech preview attribute recommendation #647 

APP : 640 Data model stability 

639 Fix data model intro

637 EAO pile on data model pr (done once submitted)

## Topic: Progressing to Done

The main blockers appear to be the following:
- ~~Beautification of the syntax discussion~~
- ~~What’s in a name? (Does NCName fix our woes? Go to UAX31? what?)~~
- ~~Quoting~~
- ~~Format-to-Parts~~
- ~~Spannables~~
- ~~Expression Attributes~~
- Registry and default functions
- Implementation and testing


Schedule:
1. No new LDML45 issues after 15 January.
2. All LDML45 issues resolved by end of F2F. Balloting alpha spec to occur 15 February.
3. Beta spec and registry by 11 March.
4. Can make limited changes thereafter, for issues discovered by implementers.
5. Release 10 April as part of LDML45
## Topic: Issue review
Let’s close all of the issues
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3ALDML45


## Topic: Data Model (#633, #632, #582)
Given choices in the Intl.MessageFormat space, we should pay reasonable attention to ensuring the data model describes “formatted messages” in an appropriate way. However, since the data model is non-normative, this seems like a task best suited for the Tech Preview period. Let’s discuss how much attention to give this in the current release.


## Topic: Number selection (#621) and other registry entries.
This week we need to conclude the values in the default registry, which are normatively required of conformant implementations. We also need to discuss how to organize non-default registry values and the extension process.

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/621

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/aphillips-number-selection/exploration/number-selection.md

SFC: main objection is the the many options in the number formatting / selection are not specified.
And the behavior for some of them is different between ECMAScript and ICU.

APP: the actual behavior is implementation defined
Agree that people will have some expectations.
The options are an intersection between the ECMAScript and ICU.

SFC: I don’t fully understand the comment about this being the intersection between ICU4J and ECMA-402. ECMA-402 is wholly a subset of ICU4J. There are things missing from ECMA-402. We can say that we support options in ECMA-402

APP: I don’t know. ECMA-402 evolves over time.

EAO: What is here that is not in ECMA-402?

SFC: Ask the other way around. THere are things in ECMA-402 that are not here.

EAO: I thought you said ECMA-402 is a subset.

SFC: No, I said ECMA-402 is a subset of ICU4J.

MIH: Example?

SFC: Rounding mode and rounding priority.

APP: Are those important in a normative way?

SFC: The whole concept of rounding is another one of my topics.

USA: I completely agree with Shane in that. For the capabilities of the registry, I thought we would have another pass through the registry.

APP: No, this is t, this is the final pass.

USA: We should introduce the new modes. THe fat that they weren’t in the original number format suggests that they could be added later.

MED: What is missing?

APP: Rounding mode.

MIH: When was this added to ECMA_402?

SFC: A year ago. It is one of the newer options, but it has been there for a year, which is not that new, by standards.

SFC: I think that it’s likely to be a challenge given that with the interactions of the 20 or so options in ECMA-402 are not fully specified. I think MessageFormat should be collecting a smaller number of options. One example is the rounding mode. We can remove most of the responsibility for rounding in the number function, and put that responsibility into the fixed decimal. That would also solve the problem of plural selection based on trailing zeroes. Another example is currency. By doing this, we reduce the number of options. My desired outcome is that the set of responsibilities for the number function is reduced and much simpler and less error-prone.

STA: My comment was going to be in line with what SFC said. In response to the question from MED about whether the function registry should be a subset of ECMA-402. If we add rounding mode, then it shows that ECMA-402 is a moving target, and so we will always be chasing compatibility.

APP: All is that well taken. We have the integer function, and I could see us also having a `scientific` or `currency` function that, by its existence, obviates and reduces the number of options. For me, what’s important is what do developers do to write a message with a numeric value format. They shouldn’t have to do any monkey business with the number before they send it to a message. They can, and that’s fine, that’s their choice. Our job is to expose formatting options that they can take advantage of to format their options. There are controls that people expect and depend on. Things like sign display and currency display are controls that they need. We are not going to write how to format numbers. We are going to write how to control the number formatters. We need a concrete list of functions and options with their values. That is the interface that people will have. We won’t point to an external specification. It needs to be stable. It needs to be implementable, not just in ECMA-402, but in any language/environment. We can be conservative in what we add because people can extend it.

USA: I have some concerns with the approach that was mentioned. It brings us into the business of doing the work of designing a minimal i18n API surface, which ECMA-402 has already being doing for a while. Not following that example will create divergence, duplicate effort, potential for confusion. It also complicates our work on the education side. People’s work to educate ECMA-402, through ex: MDN, has been successful. 

MIH: from my side, we have two sides. One is implementers. We shouldn’t look at this as “always bleeding edge” e.g. browsers. Intend to back port to android. Will implement some on way old version of ICU. not all of these will be available on all devices. Some environments will have shims. Cannot tie this to ICU. There are behavior differences between ECMA and ICU. We don’t want to overspecify, like saying ‘must behave like 402’. For developers could be a pain, e.g. if options in MF and directly in Intl do different things. Know it’s not great, but otherwise we do as APP says. Otherwise we implement number format in MF.

EAO: We’re in the business of defining how message formatting works, not how number formatting works. We are dependent on external authorities. We want to define how people talk to number formatting systems, but we don't need to know what goes on inside them. A number formatter should be at least able to stringify the number. I’m not worried about how such a specification deviates from external standards. What could be useful is defining a compatibility policy that, ex: “we won’t later add options that conflict with ECMA-402 options”. It’s not exactly redirecting users to ECMA-402, but at least we show that we don’t want to be incompatible with it.

SFC: Let me see if I can describe the position that I have heard people say. The formatting options are hints that imply how things work, and they may differ across implementations. Given that understanding, we should narrow the options to the set of hints. But we shouldn’t get into the business of specifying options that affect how things are formatted. Is that description correct that options are basically formatting hits for number formatter? The other question is whether we can distinguish separate classes of options, between those that are hints, and those that affect the formatting output.

APP: The options are hints. But in the example of an exact literal match, the number formatting options affect the number format output, which affects whether it matches. The options influence the output. On the other hand, I would complain to the implementer, if ex: minimum faction digits doesn’t produce what it expects. We can exclude options from our set of hint options if we don’t think they will have a good chance to be implementable across implementations.


EAO: I have a hard time understanding this. If the input is 1234, and we specify the number of fraction digits is 2, we can discard that. But if the input is 1234 but the style is compact, then we get 1.2K, and 

SFC: If we treat style=currency differently, and one impl shows 5, another shows $5, another shows 5.00, then we get different values as a result that are semantically different. We can say that if you use currency formatting, then you must display the currency.

APP: I think I still slightly disagree. Implementations could show different things. In the example of dates, we don’t specify what happens when you show short/long/medium/full in dates. Similarly, getting the currency out of the locale data can be problematic. My expectations as a user is that even if you are using a Perl implementation, you would get the same thing.

APP: We should start to think about an action plan about what do we want to do for formatting numbers. Also, what should we

EAO: I would be fine us requiring specifically in the example of currency that if we choose currency formatting, that we must provide options related to the currency symbol, etc.

MIH: Can we leave this for after LDML v45? If we are saying the number function’s options are different from ECMA-402, then we need to do something, but it is too late. Just as a timing thing, maybe we can come back to this.

APP: I don’t think we can do that. We need to have a minimum set of options for the formatter. We can’t have no options for functions. Learning how to write messages should be portable. Given that `:number` is currently the all-in-one number formatter, I’m going to propose that we have `:number` for number, `:integer` for integers, and maybe `:currency` is for currencies.

EAO: I think SFC’s point is valid that we have to do something with currencies and units. One thing we shouldn’t do is just take out the options to currencies and units, since people will make it up. I thnk having `currencyDisplay=none` would be difficult (?).

SFC: Because currency and units formatting convey semantic meaning, then we should require that currency display and units display have semantic meaning, we should require that the relevant options be specified when they are desired.

APP: In response to that, I’ll repeat what I said before. We don’t specify what the output is, on purpose. We don’t specify what your locale dependency is.
We don’t say “the narrow symbol must be like this, and decimal should be like that” and that’s on purpose.
But we expect developers to take it seriously and implement it.

SFC: in alignment with currency, units, split into buckets. Where the identity of the unit must be specified.

USA: aligned with Shane. But splitting out the styles would fix is not completely accurate. It would imply we have some degree of strictness. Even with different currencies the implementation might not care about it.
We don’t have to overspecify. I think that splitting the formatters does not achieve all we want.

EAO: add one sentence to the options part of the spec
“
If the `style` option is set with a value of either `currency` or `unit`,
the formatted output of a `:number` implementation MUST include some indication
of the corresponding currency or unit.”

MIH: We cannot be very strict. SFC said that you have to specify the unit of currency if you format units or currencies. Currently in ICU NumberFormatter, I can pass the currency amount, which can be, ex: 42 euro. You specify both the amount and the currency. It’s part of the argument.

SFC: ideally the semantic meaning of the formatted output should come from the input.
A currency amount (or a measurement) contains the unit.
The PR says the input is a numeric time.
Would be nice if the spec says “if you format a currency then …”

APP: the spec does not say that.
But I can delete “numeric”

SFC: A currency amount is not a numeric type. The fact that we’re having this discussion means that the specification is not doing its job. The specifications should be aligned.

APP: We allow you to pass in a currency amount or measurement amount object, and the implementation can choose how to support it. An ICU based implementation can handle all of the options, but a Perl implementation may not have support for those options.

SFC: I think it’s totally within the scope to say that “here’s the information we get from the input, here is the information we get for options from the serialized MF message string”, and combine those options appropriately.

SFC: One other thing is on the precision of the number. We can specify the precision on the input value. Say the input number has information that it has 2 fraction digits. Then we don’t need to specify minimum integer digits and minimum fraction digits. Formatting options should be things that implementations _can_ ignore without changing the semantic meaning of the output. That is what we should be aiming for.

The _operand_ of a number function is either an implementation-defined numeric type or
a literal that matches the `number-literal` production in the [ABNF](/main/spec/message.abnf).
Implementation-defined numeric types MAY be compound values that include
a currency code, a unit, or other options that are taken into account by the implementation.

MIH: I agree with EAO on trying to move for LDML and not have something controversial. I would like to cut specifying options for unit and currency formatting for the LDML v45 timeframe, and come back to it later. Unit formatting is not fully figured out, there will be changes later. We can fine tune this after LDML v45. And if taking out units and currencies makes us more likely to meet the LDML v45 deadline, then we should do so.

APP: I agree. Unit formatting has been bad for a long time, and only recently has started to be flushed out. We can’t take currency formatting out because it has been supported in MF1 for 30 some years. Everyone knows what the currency options are.

SFC: (in chat)
_If we include currency, we need to be in alignment on how semantic meaning comes in and how we handle it. I'd like to buy us time to engage in that discussion_
_If we're trying to finalize things, let's start with something small and we can add things later._

STA: I don’t understand why currency is a unit option. In Fluent, we decided to ban them a few years ago.

MIH: Translators don’t mess with the currencies today, and they shouldn’t.

SFC: My concrete proposal to move forward is that we need to have deeper thought, and there’s appetite to define where the identity of the currency and the identity of the unit comes from. We can always expand, put things in. We can’t take things out.

APP: I can agree to remove the formatting of currency and units.
As a minimum set. Reminder: we are typeless.
I would make SFC’s proposal more concrete by crossing out all currency options from the required options.
But currency is in MF1, so we might make a shim.

EAO: nobody seems to disagree with my proposal (?) (two links in the PR)

MIH: what about we leave out currency and units for LDML 45, and add currency back for final.

SFC: this is an aspect that must be done right. I’m happy to make a PR against APPs PR where I can say what is unsafe (?)

USA: I specifically prefer that solution. Is progress towards what SFC proposed. Even if we release the pre-release without everything.

APP: I’m OK to remove the currency & unit and put it in hibernation.
If there is agreement.

EAO: what I think is on the table is my proposal (two small wording changes) and the removal of currency / units.
Should I understand that your concerns are not resolved by my proposal?

SFC: probably not at this time.

EAO: can I propose for the unit of the currency to remove that from the spec? And leave this particular issue open.
Until we meet at the beginning of the call tomorrow.

MIH: SFC mentioned that number of fraction digits might be a part of the input number. I want to push back a little bit. Specifying fraction digits exists for US dollars, but not for Japanese yen. They’re kind of semantic, but also a formatting thing. It’s not obvious what to do.

STA: I’m with MIH that it is hard to discuss small / big change. I was listening to the conversation.
But I think excluding currency / unit for LDML 45 is safe to do for now.
I think combining value + unit, maybe pre-annotated values. But too complex to do in a couple of days.
Fractional digits and precision we solved by allowing the same flags on the sector.
Sure, devs can still get incorrect results if they try.

SFC: there are a couple of challenges in the fractional digits and significant digits. Mostly for compact number formatters.
We recently added compact rounding priority, which specifies how to resolve the overlap between significant digits and fractional digits. So anything that has fractional and significant digits without rounding priority is incomplete.
Maybe we can take out significant digits? And we build on it later.
Precision carries semantic meaning. The example with yen (no fractional digits) should be part of the input.
If there is a conflict between semantic meaning in input & formatting options, we need to say how to resolve it.

USA: I appreciate the discussion, some of the points made me think more about how we format numbers. But we are 2 hours in, and I don’t think that doing this now, discussing the whole design, I don’t think it is productive at this point.

APP: I hear you SFC, and I fully respect it. Especially units are a complicated field. For i18n it is important to pass the currency as part of the amount to format. Some of these options are overrides.
When legal says you MUST show 3 digits even for yen, that is an override. And these are things that people might have to do.

EAO: on who is the action item to drop these options (currency & units)

APP: it is my PR (it is a design doc), I will update it and document why.
This is important, but we also formatted numbers for a long time. I would like to get to a conclusion that we can all agree on.
I don’t want to loop around this forever and not give people the minimal “knobs” to control what they need.

SFC: it is not about types, it is about semantic meaning.
Some developers got used to min/max fractional digits. We can move ahead with that. But I didn’t hear much about the interaction between rounding modes and precision. It is a busy week for everybody.

SFC: can we defer the significant(?) digits for later on.

EAO: I would like to keep min/max fractional digits. They might have “funky behavior” for selection. I don’t mind much about small differences in output. A small change that would make me happy is “...”(?)

MIH: We are talking about fractional digits vs. significant digits. Developers have used fractional digits for a long time. If we don’t provide these options, then users will change their input values, etc. outside of MF. They will still make the same i18n as before, whether or not we support that option.

APP: will update the document on number selection.

EAO: I think with this discussion and dropping currency / units we have agreement?

MIH: I’m the same with SFC. In principle, I would say yes. What has happened before is that the followup will have something framed as “as previously agreed upon'' that does not reflect the actual previous agreement. So I want to see meeting notes captured and the PR in writing to review before confirming. TLDR: what might sound OKis in a meeting might not be fully OK when captured in writing. There might be misunderstandings when talking.

EAO: drop `:plural` and `:ordinal`. Because we already have `:number` doing all that work. With cardinal as default.

STA: I wanted to ask MIH what he thought because he had concerns about the overlap of `:plural` and `:number`

MIH: My concern was having selection on `:number`. If that’s there, and we don’t consider taking it out, then I’m fine to take `:plural` and `:ordinal` out.

APP: Who is opposed to removing `:plural`? 

STA: What do we say to users who ask “where is `:plural`”?

APP: In the short term, we say, “use `:number`”. Any objections? I hear none.

APP: Who is opposed to removing `:ordinal`?

MED: We’re not removing the functionality, right?

APP: That’s right, the functionality is still there.

MED: Then I have no objections.

APP: No objections, so we will also remove `:ordinal`.

MED: What happened to units and currency?

APP: They are out of the default registry, but they can be put in incubation functions that can be worked on during the tech preview.

---

### Date and time

APP: How about dates and times?

SFC: How do you do a date and a time together?

APP: `:datetime` does those together. Using `:date` formats just a date, `:time` formats just a time.

APP: we don’t have picture-strings (skeletons), we do option bags JS style.

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/exploration/default-registry-and-mf1-compatibility.md

MIH: My initial reaction was to not include date and time at all in the registry. But if we do put them in, then we should support all of the options in the options bag. If all we support is the length style, then all we’re doing is saving developers typing a few characters, but they don’t like the predefined styles we send them back to `:datetime`. And from what I’ve seen people are not happy with the predefined styles.

SFC: I’m aligned with APP’s point. We don’t have to support the ability for users to choose which subset of options that they need. Instead, there’s a feature called semantic skeleta. There’s not much difference between a semantic skeleton and the options bag. You can create a correspondence. I don’t want to have MF stuck in the past of how to do formatting, I want MF to be stuck in the future.

APP: Not having seen the proposal for the formatting semantic skeleta, I can’t comment on this. I am a huge proponent of using skeletons for formatting. But we have a consensus to use the options bag approach.

SFC: Semantic skeleta are similar to current skeleta, but different in how they are named.

APP: That is hard to think about.

SFC: Exactly. That’s why I wanted to raise this concern. I liked EAO’s PR because it is simple and compartmentalized to only include what it needs. But if there is a PR to address functions with skeleta in MF, then I am concerned about how we support that.

APP: Is there a transformation between semantic skeleta and current skeletons?

SFC: Semantic skeleton prevent nonsensical options that can still be represented in skeletons. Ex: a weekday with an hour.

USA: since this is about registry, we are more flexible than the syntax.

MIH: I don’t know what semantic skeleta will help with for `:date` and `:time` since the nonsensical formats happen when you include disparate granularities like “year + seconds”, but allowing separate `:date` and `:time` will already prevent a lot of that.

APP: I think it will be interesting to see that development. I don’t know how to fix current nonsensical skeletons currently except to say, “don’t write them”. 

SFC: my preference here would be to incubate the skeleton formatting for later in the year. We can still keep datestyle / timestyle. Would be a pity to lock us in the old option bags instead of semantic skeletons. I thought MF would be agnostic to this.

MIH: MF proper is agnostic to this. Registry is to MF2 like the IANA Language Subtag Registry to BCP 47.

MED: I want to point out timing. We’ve been working on this for a long time. We’ll distribute this for review at the end of this week, after these meetings. We want to vote on this in CLDR on Feb 21. If you need more time, we can maybe take it up instead on Feb 28. But we can’t sit on this for long. The next release when we can possibly come out of tech preview would be in October, but it would have to be ready before then.

The second thing is that, in CLDR, we had to develop mechanisms that specify which things are deprecated and which are aliased. I’m not saying that we want that in MF, except that it could be useful in the registry. We can say, “deprecated doesn’t mean removed, it’s still there, but don’t use”. I don’t see the problem with putting these things in the tech preview. If the timing is okay, and the skeleta look reasonable, then we could include them.

MIH brings up a good point that if you’re mapping between old system, the skeleta give you a reduced set of things to implement. But if you’re passing things from an old system that includes formatting options, then the new system should be able to handle all of those old options.

APP: The default registry includes things that people must implement in order to claim MF2 compliance. That doesn’t mean that they do anything specific. The options might not do anything. How the implementation receives these options is up to them. Although our stability policy is in advance due to our tech preview, it says that we won’t remove anything since it would invalidate messages, and the options used in those messages, that depend on them, _once we’re out of tech preview_. That is a policy we should really adhere to. One suggestion that I’ve heard and want to propose we do is to remove options bags from `:date` and `:time` and instead only allow them on `:datetime`. 

MIH: One reason that the option bags look the way they do now is because of compatibility with ECMA-402. What will happen to ECMA-402 when the semantic skeleton come?

SFC: We can’t remove things from EMCA-402. We can’t answer whether they will be added to `Intl.DateTime`.

MIH: This introduces friction points.

APP: Here is the design doc for date and time formatting, which includes the options.

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/exploration/default-registry-and-mf1-compatibility.md

MED: Who is opposed to keeping the options for the date and time functions as specified in the design doc?

SFC: I am opposed, for the reasons specified earlier.

EAO: I am also opposed.

STA: I don’t have a strong opinion.

---

STA: I like the idea to remove options. Can we do something similar for `:number`?
In 402 there is no `style`, there is only `datestyle` and `timestyle`.
I would rather not add options that are not in 402.

APP: I oppose removing the `style`, because we need to give people some control.

MED: I agree because we need to include `style` in order for this to be useful to users during tech preview.

SFC: My objective is not hard, so I can live with that.

STA: my understanding is that we keep style, but only on `:date` and `:time`. Kind of our own namespace.

SFC: these documents seem to be all recently opened. The biggest problem that has been plaguing people for many years are timezones. I am a bit concerned by how this is handled in MF2. The timezone should be attached to the thing to format, not on the formatting string.

APP: many of these options are overrides.

SFC: USA also knows that we worked a long time to define how to handle timezones.

MIH: Clarifying question for SFC. Options can be specified such as `...{exp :time style=long timezone=$tz}...`. These options can come from outside. It just saves a developer from having to define a custom type and a custom function.

USA: I agree with SFC in the different cases where we can have a mismatch between timezones are inconsistent and implementation specific. But I can’t imagine a way to specify that.

APP: we can document what is recommended, guidance for developers, but it does not invalidate having the options.

SFC: I have grave, grave concerns about having timezone in the options. And I would like to remove it from the tech preview, and continue the discussion over the summer.

EAO: can we have this as a final agreement? Remove the timezone option and discuss it later? Over the summer, or whatever.

APP: I will do the change. But we will not discuss anything extra. Just yes / no, because we discussed it for a long time today.

SFC: There is a similar problem with the calendar system. It is the same type of problem as with time zones. If the calendar is provided with the input date, then there is a problem if it differs from what the formatted string. Only if there is no specific calendar system provided with the input date do we pull the calendar from the locale. This is a concern that is well understood in ECMA-402 for a long time.

MIH: A reminder is that a lot of these options are also in the locale identifier. So we can have a timezone in the input (the thing to format), as an option in the formatter, and on the locale.

SFC: If we move these things into incubation, then they can be worked on in an incubation mode during the tech preview. Number system is a similar thing that could use further work.

EAO: Agreement to also move the numbering system option to incubation.

APP: need to look at the doc in the PR for that
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/aphillips-number-selection/exploration/number-selection.md

SFC: does `:integer` allow min/max significant digits?

EAO: yes, but are implementation specific.

SFC: then I would propose removing them.

SFC: for percent, do you divide by 100 or not? ICU and ECMA behave differently.

SFC: My recommendation is to start small in terms of supported options, and add over time.

SFC: Grouping separator is another option that is debatable.

APP: Not specifying grouping separator is a mistake.

EAO: I am OK with `:integer` the way it is. The feedback is coming too late to act on it.

MIH: I agree that it is very late. On the other hand, we shouldn’t shut down a solid technical argument. After all, we changed our syntax significantly after 1.5 years of stability, even though it caused us to miss our deadline to be done by the end of 2023.

STA: I would say that being so late, if we want to ship something, it is safer to drop features.


## Topic: Registry Maintenance
Includes whether to reserve all single-letter namespaces


## Topic: Dataflow composability (#645)
Let’s discuss Tim’s proposal.

## Topic: AOB?


