# 15 January 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
* Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
* Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
* Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)
* Simon Clark - Oracle (SCA)
* Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
* Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
* Tim Chevalier (TIM)
* Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)


Scribe: MIH


## Agenda

## Topic: Action Item Review
- [x] Write security considerations section (APP)
- [x] Split errors and data model from formatting (APP)
- [ ] Addison: set up F2F replacement calls for 12-15 February
- [ ] Addison: set up call about registry format
- [ ] Addison: set up call with EAO about bidi

## Info Share
Community Engagement would like to have an Open House in late February.
* Do we want to do this?
   * Who would like to do this?
   * When?

EAO: FOSDEM 24, I’ll be talking about the MF2 data model at FOSDEM in a few weeks: https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-1759-a-universal-data-model-for-localizable-messages/

EAO: asking for blessing of Intl.MessageFormat to stage 2 at next meeting

## Face-to-Face replacement

Action: addison: set up calls 12-15

## Topic: Progressing to Done

The main blockers appear to be the following:
- ~~Beautification of the syntax discussion~~
- ~~What’s in a name? (Does NCName fix our woes? Go to UAX31? what?)~~
- ~~Quoting~~
- ~~Format-to-Parts~~
- ~~Spannables~~
- ~~Expression Attributes~~
- Registry and default functions
- Implementation and testing


Schedule:
1. No new LDML45 issues after 15 January.
2. All LDML45 issues resolved by end of F2F. Balloting alpha spec to occur 15 February.
3. Beta spec and registry by 11 March.
4. Can make limited changes thereafter, for issues discovered by implementers.
5. Release 10 April as part of LDML45

## Topic: Closing off scope for LDML45

## Topic: Default registry and MF1 compatibility matrix

## Topic: :string selector

## Topic: Active PR review

|  PR  |                                           Description                                          |          Recommendation         |
|:----:|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:-------------------------------:|
| #594 |                              Add :string as formatter and selector                             |             Discuss             |
| #593 |                               Split errors into their own section                              |              Merge              |
| #588 |                               Add security considerations section                              |              Merge              |
| #584 |                                    Add new terms to glossary                                   |        Discuss (post 45)        |
| #582 |                          Allow options on closing markup placeholders                          |             Discuss             |
| #577 | Clarify the Duplication Option Name is a data model error                                      | Merge (resolve needed)          |
| #570 | Add :date and :time aliases                                                                    | Discuss                         |
| #566 | Improve bidi isolation requirements                                                            |                                 |
| #562 | Add content-char as common root of simple-start-char, text-char, quoted-char and reserved-char | Discuss                         |
| #560 | Add a <matchSignature> for :number together with :ordinal and :plural aliases                  | Discuss                         |
| #558 | Add <when> to help select the right <match>                                                    | Discuss (separate call pending) |

## Topic: Open Issue Review

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues
Currently we have 36 open (was 38 last time).
7 are resolved-candidate and proposed for close.
6 are Agenda+ and proposed for discussion.
8 are Future (nor for this release)
21 are LDML45
8 require release triage

| Issue |  Status |                   Description                   |   Chair's Recommendation  |
|:-----:|:-------:|:-----------------------------------------------:|:-------------------------:|
| #579  | Agenda+ | Security considerations section                 | Close (addressed by #588) |
| #547  | Agenda+ | Consider syntax of reserved-statement some more | Close (obsolete?)         |
| #519  | Agenda+ | Name syntax should align with XML               | Close (obsolete?)         |
| #433  | Agenda+ | How to name string-match selector               | Discuss                   |
| #408  | Agenda+ | Validate runtime types through the registry     | Discuss                   |
| #407  | Agenda+ | Are regexes good enough to validate literals?   | Discuss                   |


## Topic: AOB?

---

## Info Sharing

**Eemeli FOSDEM:** we’ll be talking about the MF2 data model at FOSDEM in a few weeks: https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-1759-a-universal-data-model-for-localizable-messages/

Unicode: open house end of February.

**Face to face:** canceled. But we still have to do the work somehow.
Proposed Mon 12 - Thu 15, February 2024. Daily.

**Implementation:** Eemeli has a JSON driven test suite
How to make these more accessible to others.
Eemeli will make a PR with the files.

MIH: ICU adding support for JSON for testing

Spec: we keep the date of 11 March

## Active PRs

### Add <when> to help select the right <match> #558

Mark as FUTURE. Registry is not consumable by tools, for now

### Add a <matchSignature> for :number, together with :ordinal & :plural aliases #560

Postpone, not 100% agreement on naming (`:number`)

MIH: Will create an issue.

### Add content-char as common root of simple-start-char, text-char, quoted-char & reserved-char #562

APP: After this let’s try to not touch the EBNF.
STA: some small changes in names

APP: to create an issue to review the names of all productions

STA: Back to 562: if it has no functionality changes, OK with it

### Improve bidi isolation requirements #566

APP: some of us will drive this to DONE. Will not merge it today.
EAO: schedule a call with those interested

### Add :date and :time functions #570

APP: Names for stuff in registry. Postpone (same as the one above)

### Clarify that Duplicate Option Name is a data model error #577

Merge.

### Allow options on closing markup placeholders #582

XLIFF: closing markup needs closing ID

Pros: not needed for HTML
Cons: we leave it out, will be out forever (more or less)

APP: writing a narrowing in EBNF and widening it later is more painful than the other way around.

### Add new terms to glossary #584

APP: Editorial propose post 45

### Add security considerations section #588

APP: my work was done. Merge, and iterate on it?

### Split errors into their own section #593

APP: Thank EAO
APP: resolve conflict and merge

### Add :string as formatter and selector #594

APP: some people were not satisfied with :string
But we have to decide.

APP: all in violent agreement :-)
Can be abused, but can also be very handy.
And calling it :string gives a bit of friction.

### Add missing hourCycle to :datetime timeStyle/dateStyle <formatSignature> #597

Merged

## Issues

STA: I want to open an issue to eliminate the requirement for *

APP: would like to file issues, but either future or out of scope. Because we try to freeze the feature set.
I will add findings as a chair if I see such issues.

---

EAO: concerns about delimiters

APP: file and tag as future
We use `||` for this release

---

EAO: do we want more things in the registry.

APP: %, currency
ICU4J has spellout & duration
Also has `choice`, deprecated.

STA, APP, MIH: `:date` and `:time` as aliases (some uneasiness)

APP: to agree in 45: minimal that everyone should do. Default registry.


