# 11 November 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

### Attendees

- Addison Phillips \- Unicode (APP) \- chair  
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)  
- Elango Cheran \- Google (ECH)  
- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)  
- Mark Davis \- Google (MED)  
- Richard Gibson \- OpenJSF (RGN)  
- Tim Chevalier \- Igalia (TIM)  
- 

  
**Scribe:** MIH  
**Previous Scribe:** ECH

To request that the chair add an *issue* to the agenda, add the label `Agenda+` To request that the chair add an agenda item, send email to the message-format-wg group email.

## [**Agenda**](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/wiki#agenda)

To request that the chair add an *issue* to the agenda, add the label `Agenda+` To request that the chair add an agenda item, send email to the message-format-wg group email.

### Topic: `resolve-candidate`

*The following issues are proposed for resolve:*

- 856 (Update CLDR test data)  
- 818 (The re-use of :function between annotation and output positions can be confusing  
- 724 (MessageFormat unquoted literals)  
- 677 (Other issues in the registry section)  
- 663 (Provide structure in the registry for distinguishing types of options)


### Topic: Test schema src property as an array of strings? (\#923)

*Quick and dirty: let’s spend five minutes to resolve this.*

### Topic: Stability policy should cover option values (\#928, \#929)

*This is an issue that is an outgrowth of \#925. \#929 is the PR from Eemeli. We should discuss this minor alteration of the proposed stability policy.*

APP: we say something about function names, about option names. This talks about what we do with option values. For example accept string values, or numeric values, or keywords.  
I put some wording in there.

EAO: although I filed 928, i would rather not introduce a stability policy on option values. 

APP: the policy specifies things that we will never do.  
We reserve u: for ourselves. But the policy is “we will never do” certain things

MED: we have to reserve all single letters for Unicode.  
And even to introduced an `x:`, meaning “private use” 

APP: we have an infinity of options.

MED: pull this back. Reserved all single letters for CLDR. And then we decide what to do.

APP: makes sense to me.

EAO: single ascii, or single any letter?

MED: single ascii, since we’re restricting function names to ascii

EAO: I’m fine, with that, with a discussion on x: later.  
I am happy to create a PR.

EAO: What do we want to do about option values?

MED: we don’t have namespaces for option values.  
See   
[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/925\#issuecomment-2468584380](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/925#issuecomment-2468584380)

MED: we ought to be stronger than “not recommended”, but we can discuss it later.

APP: Summarizing, we are not stabilizing the option values. EAO will create a PR to reserve single letters for us.

EAO: what I think is still open allowing the emission of errors / warnings.

APP: you must allow all options we say are standard. So you can’t emit an error, or you are not conformant.  
You might report an invalid values.

EAO: if we forbid bad option then you must also say that we treat that option as it was not set at all.  
It is also connected to the fallback PR that is still open.  
Because we also mentioned there emitting an error but somehow still resolve a value.

MED: general principle is to get a formatted value, even if you report an error.

APP: they are unrecoverable, but not fatal failures.

EAO: I think that saying that functions not in the spec should / must use a namespace would address all of my concerns.

MED: quite likely we make that a **MUST** before the release in march.  
Requiring a namespace for non-standard/optional functions and for non-non-standard/optional options for standard/optional functions 

EAO: APP, are you going to add an unsupported option error?  
We need text about what is allowed.

APP: anyone, commend on this until tomorrow.

### Topic: Add a :number offset option (\#701, \#926)

*Mark proposed adding an `offset` option to `:number` for parity with MF1. We discussed including this last week, but need a PR. Mihai created a PR (\#926). There appears to be support for closing this PR in favor of a new function, possibly `:math subtract`*

APP: looks like we want to make a separate function doing the offset.

MIH: THink we got there through working on lists. Seen impls that don’t use lists.

MED: Not thinking about lists. Think it is cleaner to have things that modify the ‘core value’ not be in the formatting/selector functions. Like the proposal of :math subtract because clear

EAO: Note that if we go down the road of math subtract. Should be easy to say looks same as :integer or :number. Looks most closely. 

MIH: Dunno. Thinking about the original offset, maybe some languages don’t do subtraction thing.

APP: I agree with EAO that it works like a subtraction.

EAO: if we go with :math it does not need all the options we have for :number. :math would only do subtraction at this point.

APP: we need a PR.

MED: it would typically be applied to an input parameter, then have a separate .local :number to get the formatting options. 

EAO: if I don’t get it done by the time I am in San Francisco I will let you know on slack.

EAO: if we have :math with `subtract` then people will really expect `add` too.

EAO: I will do `sub` or `subtract` only.

APP: let’s discuss more on the PR

### Topic: Fix fallback value definition and use (\#903)

*This change appears to be complete, but has no approvals. Please review this work before the call.*

### Topic: Defining “locale” options for date/time related functions (\#911)

*These options don’t appear to be controversial, but details of their nomenclature and such are still outstanding. Let’s discuss before merging any changes.*

### Topic: Currency Formatting (\#915)

*Last week we discussed concluding this work. The remaining topic of discussion is the `currencyDisplay` option’s values. Let’s discuss that option and then merge the results.*

### Topic: Unit Formatting (\#922)

*Last week we discussed taking :unit as optional if our work was done. Propose merging it.*

## **Topic: PR Review**

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#929 | Limit spec-defined option values | Discuss |
| \#927 | Replace Composition with Resolved Value sections for default functions | Merge |
| \#926 | Adding a :number offset option | Discuss |
| \#925 | Provide normative guidance on function/option/option value implementation | Merge |
| \#923 | Test schema: allow src property to either be a string or array of strings | Discuss, Merge |
| \#922 | Implement :unit as OPTIONAL in the registry | Merge |
| \#915 | Implement :currency function in default registry | Discuss, Merge |
| \#911 | Define locale options for :datetime :date and :time | Discuss, Merge |
| \#903 | Fix fallback value definition and use | Discuss |
|  \#842 | Match numbers numerically | Reject |
| \#584 | Add new terms to glossary | Reject |

### Replace Composition with Resolved Value sections for default functions (\#927)

APP: anyone against merging this?  
I will hold until we resolve the other functions to avoid conflicts.

EAO: you can merge it and fix the others

APP: I will merge it.

### Test schema: allow src property to either be a string or array of strings (\#923)

EAO: Is the last comment still my question?

APP: yes

EAO: if it is a superset then the superset would allow for an array of strings. (?)

TIM: would be nicer when we write multiline options.

EAO: would be good for this PR to come with some tests being changed.

TIM: I can also change some of the tests that take internal newlines.  
I will make sure I don’t replace newlines that are preserved when we test “space” behavior

EAO: I would like to sit on it until later.

APP: I will remove the 46.1 label. We can always merge sooner if ready

### Implement :unit as OPTIONAL in the registry (\#922)

APP: can I merge it?

EAO: I still have concerns.

APP: I am happy to hold it pending your review.

### Implement :currency function in default registry (\#915)

APP: I took all the options that ICU / CLDR has, which are more than Intl do.  
Is this sufficiently backed to put in?

EAO: I don’t see a strong argument for including `variant`.  
I don’t think it is well rationalized. I understand `none` and `hidden`.  
Since they are no in JavaScript  

APP: I think we should have it because ICU has it. But I think that using it is bad.

EAO: I would prefer leaving it out.  
Trying to cram all in this release can result in a suboptimal solution.

EAO: looking at `formal` I understand what it does.

EAO: all of us think that symbol is “the slot where you shove the currency value”

EAO: since we have narrow symbol / wide symbols, so something like a formal symbol works.

APP: anyone against submitting it, without variant?

EAO: why `none` instead of `hidden`

APP: consistency with other values, where we have `none`, so that people don’t have to learn all kind of values.

APP: Intl seems to use `never` quite a bit.

EAO: I think we also have `never` for use grouping

### Define locale options for :datetime :date and :time (\#911)

APP: some of these are not locale options. So I would prefer something different as header.

EAO: was easier to separate them out so that we don’t repeat it 3 times.  
The options come directly from the Intl constructor.

APP: we repeat the other options between the functions, so what is 3 more?

EAO: the locale options are optional as a whole.  
If you support them, you support all of them.

APP: why is that true? Why package as a block?

EAO: because that seems to make sense?

EAO: the “valid” should be “well formed”

APP: hour12 / hour cycle.  
Do we want to replace it?

EAO: Yes, I want hour12 to replace the hour cycle.  
This is something people understand. h11 / h12 / h23 / h24 is it more than they care.

APP: this is also something that should be controlled by the locale.

MIH: I’m fine with hour12, the hour cycle is in LDML, but it is mostly for patterns.  
And the spec mixes patterns with skeletons a bit too much.

EAO: timezone, calendar, numbering system should be optional.

APP: I would rather see the timezone required.  
It is something that people need to do with messages.  
For a long time JS only supported a limited number of timezones.

EAO: JS now has temporal, that has a zoned time, and how would that interact with timezone?

APP: I have answers to all of these questions.

APP: calendar is optional numbering system not everyone can support.

### Fix fallback value definition and use (\#903)

APP: if I understand it correctly, it means we need to walk back the chain.  
I think we should stop until we find it.

EAO: Yes. This reverts the behavior to be what we had.  
When you have a function that has a return value that is a user object, we don’t want that a failure prints out this serialized form.

EAO: we don’t object to literals “sneaking in output”. Only runtime values.

MIH: \+1 to not print runtime values. But I don’t understand the connection with walkback

EAO:  
```  
.local $user \= {$username :get-user}  
.local $name \= {$user :get field=nammme}  
```  
We walk up the chain to fallback to `{$username}`  
Because if we fallback to `{$user}` that is a local variable that the translator might have introduced.

MIH: would in fact expect exactly `{$user}`, because that is where the error is. Invalid field value (“nammme”). If I look at $username I see no error.

APP, TIM: agree with Mihai

EAO: OK, I can make the change

TIM: in the system we have in ICU a fatal error does not give you a fallback value.

APP: in this case there some wording about this behavior ??? not prescribed ???

TIM: I’ll think about it a bit more.

### Match numbers numerically (\#842)

APP: we still don’t define a way to compare numeric values. Last time, we agreed to keep our matching behavior the same as we have it. Thus, make no changes for v46.1.

EAO: So exact matching is an implementation defined behavior?

APP: it is “somewhat defined” for integers.

EAO: then I would like to see wording saying this is implementation defined behavior.  
I am fine to leave it implementation defined, but with wording that “here there be dragons”

EAO: should I modify this, or create a new PR

APP: let’s do a fresh PR. We will close this one.

### Add new terms to glossary (\#584) 

APP: I propose to not do this now.

## Extras

APP: I will be aggressive in closing issues. If you want to see any of them speak before Friday.

APP: if you think an issue is important, we can tag it as “blocker candidate” or “future”

APP: 2 weeks from now we want to ballot and this is it, 2.0.  
All PRs should go in before the next call, or be in a state that allows us to just merge in the meeting.  
Any issues should also be resolved.

EAO: I will be in San Francisco, so my time might be limited.

APP: we already decided that `:unit` goes in only if everything else is resolved.

APP: the next few days I will be unable to talk. But might be able to type.  
Towards the end of the week there will be a flurry of activity.  
Please interact in PRs, approve, comment, etc.  
I would like this to be in position for next Monday.

EAO: should he have a PR to remove all the mentions of “draft”?

APP: I will do that.  
I am also working on linkifying where possible.

## Topic: Issue review

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues)

Currently we have 30 open (was 32 last time).

* 9 are tagged for 46.1  
* 7 are `Preview-Feedback`  
* 5 are `resolve-candidate` and proposed for close.  
* 1 is `Agenda+` and proposed for discussion.  
* None are ballots

| Issue | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#928 | Stability policy should cover option values | Seek PR |
|  |  |  |



## **Topic: AOB?**

- 

