# 18 December 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Markus Scherer - Google (MWS)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Mark Davis - Google (MED)
- Nebojša Ćirić - Google (NEB)
- Simon Clark - Oracle (SCA)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Shane Carr - Google (SFC)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)

Scribe: ECH, MED
## Topic: Action Item Review


## Face-to-Face update and logistics
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/wiki/Face%E2%80%90to%E2%80%90Face-Tomales-California 

MIH: I got no confirmation email after registering.

APP: I will follow up.

## Topic: Progressing to Done

The main blockers appear to be the following:
- ~~Beautification of the syntax discussion~~
- ~~What’s in a name? (Does NCName fix our woes? Go to UAX31? what?)~~
- ~~Quoting~~
- ~~Format-to-Parts~~
- Spannables
- Expression Attributes
- Registry and default functions
- Implementation and testing


Proposed schedule:
1. No new LDML45 issues after 15 January.
2. All LDML45 issues resolved by end of F2F. Balloting alpha spec to occur 11 February.
3. Beta spec and registry by 11 March.
4. Can make limited changes thereafter, for issues discovered by implementers.
5. Release 10 April as part of LDML45

APP: MED sent an email proposing a schedule, and I have modified it based on our Monday meeting schedule. The MF2 release would go into LDML in CLDR for CLDR v45. No new issues opened for the release after 15 January. All issues will be resolved by end of face to face meeting.

EAO: Is it proper to call the spec LDML 45 rather than CLDR 45?

MED: For historical reasons, the spec is called LDML 45. Whereas the project / repo is called CLDR.

STA: APP you mentioned the email. Did I miss it?

APP: It was a personal email.

STA: It’s an aggressive timeline, but I like it. There are some thoughts I have about the registry, but they can be reverted and postponed.

MED: APP doesn’t like the name “MVP” (minimum viable product), but I think it’s important to getting something done and functional. We need to make some progress. We should focus on getting the syntax done, and getting an implementation of the spec. If we see something that needs changing during the beta, we can do that. But I want to put a stick in the ground, and it’s been 2 years since I last put a stick in the ground, and we need to see some progress.

APP: We should think in terms of operating as if the stability policy is in place. We should be agreeing on the normative parts of the spec that are required. We need to have something practical and available for people to use. I’ve been saying that for a while, and we’ve been making rapid progress, but we need to cut off detailed discussions that aren’t 

NEB: It sounds like we’re still in the design phase of certain features, so as long as we have the core of the spec in place, and concrete implementation in place, it will be easier to add on details based on how it gets used in practice.

APP: I slightly disagree with throwing some features aside. There are people we want to bring along, like tools. I’m particularly concerned about how these things get used, such as functions and options. I don’t want to treat those features as “not real” because it’s not putting in the effort for normative

MED: I agree with that. What I meant is that the syntax for functions, function syntax, options, and option syntax needs to be clear. But that the XML syntax doesn’t have to be finalized as a blocker of the release, which is my main concern. I think the syntax for those things can come soon after the release.

EAO: We could have a separate call for talking about the registry, and do this within the timeframe of resolving issues for LDML 45.

APP: We can talk about what parts of the registry we want in the spec, and when. I agree that having a machine readable version of the default spec. 

MED: The worry that I have is that one can bikeshed over XML structure a lot. What I am saying is not have that be a blocker for the rest. If it happens to get done, then great.

APP: So what I understand is that we will ______ . We will create a machine readable description of the registry after the LDML 45 release.

EAO: I want to have a separate call to determine the details and timelines.

APP: Let’s have that separate meeting. Can we agree that that’s the low bar?

STA: Agreed to what you said. I also think that for the tech preview release to be successful, I think we need to invest time in writing docs and examples. I know it will be a lot of work, and that we want to have a test suite.

APP: Testing is on the list of things we want to do. Let’s focus energy on getting things stabilized first. There is plenty of time to work on the other things.

EAO: I’m okay with that low bar so long as we have agreement on the stability policy.

## Topic: Stability policy relaxation

See Issue #568

APP: Okay. EAO’s issue for that is #568, which is to relax the position of our stability policy that say s we won’t introduce message syntax that isn’t backwards compatible. That allows us to update our syntax as we go

SCA: What happens when we discover that backwards incompatible changes are necessary is that we could introduce rigorous semantic versioning. Do we say that it could be version 2.1, or do we have to go to 3.0 if there is breaking change?

APP: We want the stability policy, but we don’t feel confident in imposing it just now until we get much more adoption. Once we get that, then we can impose the stability policy.

EAO: Applying semver to a spec like this is challenging. There is no understanding of what semver really means.

MED: “Tech preview” in Unicode parlance means that we will change things, but we won’t do so without good reason. Once we move out of tech preview, we won’t make breaking changes. So at that time, we would reserve special characters to allow for extensions. But the next version would not have to be backwards compatible with the tech preview.

APP: Introducing a MF v3 would a terrible thing because then we would have multiple versions of the syntax using curly braces meaning different things. We already have reserved keywords, and we have reserved syntax that we can use later as needed. I want to hear from people who use this thing.

MWS: I’m trying to figure out what exactly we’re talking about. We have a syntax and a spec. And reserved syntax pieces. If I have an implementation of the spec and if it finds a new feature, then the implementation will not know what it is. But we just want to not have that new feature not be a syntax error.

EAO: If we agree to relaxing this stability policy, then we should remove all of the reserved keywords, and then decide to put them back in.

APP: I would oppose doing that. The reserved annotations allow us to create 

MED: We have to face the reality that if we don’t lock things down, then people won’t use it in production. They can try it out, but won’t depend upon it. If we lock things down too much, it won’t support future enhancements. So the way to handle this is that we reserve keywords. We can relax that a little bit by saying “we don’t expect to make future changes, but we may.”

MWS: Mostly what MED said. “Tech preview” for ICU and CLDR means that anything could change, but we don’t wnat to do so willy nilly unless there is good reason. This doesn’t agree strictly with the semantic versioning idea, but so long as it doesn’t proceed for more than 1-2 releases, I think it is okay.

EAO: I have disagreements with our agreements with our pattern delimiters and delimiters of value literals. If we get feedback from others later so that we don’t need to reach consensus, I would like going ahead.

APP: We’ve talked about these portions of this syntax. I want us to be disagree-and-commit, and I want you to be disagree-and-commit. When we get this out in the field to get feedback, then I’m open to hearing what people say. But I don’t want to revisit and reopen issues, and we already have extensive documentation on our previous discussions, including why we didn’t want quotation marks as delimiters.

STA: I hope we get feedback on the technical preview. But it’s hard to design a priori how to respond to that feedback before we get any. We should trust our design and decision making process up to this point. But we should not be making changes to 

MED: I’m in alignment with what APP and STA are saying. We need to be alignment with what we’re producing, otherwise we will never finish. We want to hear feedback from implementations, positive and negative, and we reserve the right to make changes as needed.

NEB: We already have a technical preview implementation in ICU in Java (ICU4J). The feedback was minimal. We need to work on getting feedback from the next preview, esp from implementers and companies contributing to the spec. I know from experience from Temporal in JavaScript (ECMA-402), we should really avoid changing the spec while people are implementing it. ECMA-402 Temporal has a lot of churn, and some developers have given up on implementing the spec until the churn is over.

APP: I want to take a temperature check on whether EAO, are you okay with going forward with this?

EAO: In general, yes. I like the idea of reserving the right to make changes. And that is not specifically calling out delimiters for quoted literals and quoted patterns.


## Topic: Spannables

Can we resolve on hash-and-slash? What syntax do we use for standalone?

APP: We’ve talked about this, we’ve agree to use the “hash and slash” syntax. STA has mentioned that we need a standalone construct. Are we at a point that we can make that the choice? Or just strict hash-and-slash with no distinct standalone?

EAO: Nobody has yet created a PR to make this standalone change.

APP: Doesn’t STA’s PR do that?

STA: I didn’t yet create a new PR for this because we agreed to discuss this, so I didn’t want to get ahead of myself. We previously considered a standalone construct when previously discussing `+` and `-` sigils, then we included it, then it got removed as an editorial change, which I was not happy about. I think we need this.

APP: The other change I’ve seen is the “hash-slash” style, so that your lookahead is only 3.

EAO: {#/img … } vs {#img … /}

MWS: In HTML, we don’t have specific syntax that distinguishes between an open element and a standalone element. I would like us to not have that ambiguity. I don’t have any stake in ay particular syntax choice. I would just like their to be a distinction between open and standalone.

STA: Responding to APP, the `/` at the end of the identifier is not too big of a change to the syntax because it’s just a change at the end of the production for the identifier. The change I would like is to make ____ as default ignorable. I think that would be a good change to have _____ default to being ignorable, like for img tags.

EAO: I don’t think we need a standalone element, but I am not strongly opposed to it. But I don’t want to revisit our decision on having toString default behavior on standalone elements. That is too big of a change for our tech preview deadline.

APP: We can reserve syntax characters. I think it’s cleaner if we do prefixing, rather than on the trailing end, because we’re permissive about whitespace. Otherwise, the main thing is that we need to fix the sigils for functions for ABNF so that `+` and `-` aren’t there, and then we need to move along.

MED: I’m in favor of adding a standalone construct. It does match what you do in XHTML. It is an advantage in processing to know which things are paired or not. Otherwise, your processing software will have to do a lookup.

EAO: If our proposal is to have `#foo/`, then I’m okay to have to have it in the PR that will be designated as accepted. If the proposal is anything else, then I would like to have that be a separate decision.

MIH: I don’t mind the syntax, whether it’s `#foo/` or `#/foo` or anything else. I care about having a standalone construct to know about pairing and behavior. In HTML, you can currently have custom elements, and you can’t make assumptions about the behavior, and it matters to messages. You can have an open tag that has the attribute `locale=”fr”`, and it means that the text following is in French. But if there is a standalone element representing some UI widget like a calendar picker with `locale=”fr”`, then the behavior is very different.

APP: So we’re all in agreement. We’ll have the “hash and slash” for standalone elements.

EAO: What does “hash and slash” mean? Is it `#foo/` or `#/foo`?

APP: The syntax for standalone 

MED: {#p …} foo {/p …} and {#/img}   {#p …/}

EAO: I don’t want to make changes to the PR if it requires adding options on the close placeholder. Because I don’t think it’s necessary.

STA: I disagree with EAO because the use case for adding id options on close placeholders has been known for a while.

APP: It sounds to me like it is a feature at risk.

STA: I think it is okay to merge the PR and then follow up on options on the close placeholder.

APP: What we’re proposing today is that  `{#p …} foo {/p}` and `{#img/}` are our style of spannable syntax.

MED: STA will be proposing `{/p …}`

STA: And adding options on close elements is a new PR.

APP: Yes.


## Topic: U+3000 as foldable whitespace (Issue #498)

Let's briefly discuss this

APP: Can we agree on this?

MED: Yes, in the Far East, this is an important decision.

EAO: MIH, does this have to do with your points about whitespace preceding or trailing simple messages?

MIH: No, that is unrelated to this topic. Simple message leading and trailing whitespace are a part of the pattern. Rather, this topic has implications for the whitespace between keywords in code mode.

APP: As a syntax space, we should encourage implementers to fold this into an ASCII space.

EAO: disagrees?


## Topic: Default registry and MF1 compatibility matrix

See PR #564

## Topic: Active PR review
Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call.
The recommendation "discuss" is to ensure there is WG consensus before merging. The recommendation "merge with edits" is to merge once existing comments have been addressed.
Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call.

|  PR  |                                           Description                                          |        Recommendation       | Comment |
|:----:|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:---------------------------:|---------|
| #570 | Add :date and :time aliases                                                                    | Discuss                     |         |
| #567 | Re-add accidentally dropped message validity condition                                         | Merge                       |         |
| #566 | Improve bidi isolation requirements                                                            | Discuss                     |         |
| #564 | (Design) Default registry and MF1 compatibility matrix                                         | Discuss                     |         |
| #563 | Describe registry use and conformance                                                          | Merge                       |         |
| #562 | Add content-char as common root of simple-start-char, text-char, quoted-char and reserved-char | Discuss                     |         |
| #560 | Add a <matchSIgnature> for :number, together with :ordinal and :plural aliases                 | Discuss                     |         |
| #558 | Add <when> to help select the right <match>                                                    | Discuss                     |         |
| #557 | (Design) Exact Match Selector Options                                                          | Merge                       |         |
| #541 | Accept open-close design doc                                                                   | Discuss                     |         |
| #502 | Make option values options, defaulting to true                                                 | Discuss                     |         |
| #473 | Expand expression attributes proposal                                                          | Discuss                     |         |
| #450 | Define @attributes on expressions                                                              | Discuss (with #473)         |         |
| #438 | Add details to “Missing Selector Annotation error” section                                     | Close (per 2023-12-11 call) |         |

The recommendation "discuss" is to ensure there is WG consensus before merging. The recommendation "merge with edits" is to merge once existing comments have been addressed.

APP: On issue #567, a sentence got dropped and needs to be added back in. It’s normative. Any objections?

APP: On issue #563, it adds a normative section to the spec on the registry. It is a normative text. Any objectives to merging? No.

APP: On issue #557, we discussed what to name the exact match selector. We landed on `:string`. Any other thoughts?

MWS: `:string` doesn’t sound like it is matching stuff.

MED: Is it named `:string` because it is an exact string match? Like, you wouldn’t match `1.0` to `1`?

APP: Correct.

MWS: It seems confusing if someone comes to it fresh.

MED: I can see not naming it `:select` because a lot of things do selection.

EAO: We discussed `:number` to be the name of the selector for `:plural` that has options to specify cardinal / ordinals.

MWS: It seems confusing to have the same names for formatting and selection when they do different things.

MED: It’s been a long standing understanding that the formatting and selection are bound together, and for good reason.

MIH: The choice of `:number` is not agreed, so I don’t know why it keeps getting said that there is consensus as such.

STA: No strong opinion on this, but if `:number` has special behavior where it’s able to match plural categories on top of numerical values, wouldn’t it be weird if `:string` didn’t have that behavior? It seems like there is an asymmetry.

APP: Briefly, I think we have open items about `:number` and its aliases. That is issue #560 as a discussion item. Looking at the designs for those options is helpful. `:string` is useful for things like collation, etc. But here, we are discussing matching.

MED: EAO mentioned the alias option. When I hear “alias”, I think it means “exactly the same as”. But they are not the same. So `:ordinal` is not the same as `:number type=ordinal`, right?

APP: Correct.

SCA: Everything that we choose will be confusing in some way. I am fine with this.

STA: Could we merge this as “proposed” and then consider other ideas?

APP: I’ll give this a week, and if we don’t have other options, then we can merge it. I don’t want to keep this open long since this is a minor decision.

STA: It’s true that it’s minor, so we don’t need to do balloting. But it’s okay if it stays open for a week or two.



## Topic: AOB?




