# 4 December 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Sta≈õ Ma≈Çolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)

Scribe: RGN, ECH

## Topic: Agenda Review

## Topic: Info Share

EAO: I‚Äôve submitted PRs for metadata and data model definition

## Topic: Action Item Review

## Face-to-Face update and logistics

APP: Almost have approval from Unicode, working on final logistics. Dates are Feb 8 through 11 (departing on the 12).

## Restricting reserved syntax to declarations (#547)

In this week‚Äôs discussion, it was proposed that we limit future reserved keywords to declarations.

APP: Should reserved statements be allowed to replace the `.match` head?

APP: Proposal is for them to be declarations only.

RGN: I would like to have that be a full replacement for `.match` in its entirety. Currently we don‚Äôt have that affordance.

APP: There‚Äôs a syntactic challenge in finding the end of a statement, whereas declarations end with an expression.

RGN: My proposal is that a reserved-statement goes until another statement. And if there isn‚Äôt one, it goes all the way until the end. It already achieves that.

STA: Maybe we should keep `.match` at the end. I‚Äôm concerned about building in too much flexibility. It could be easier to think about things if `.match` is just another declaration. This was my thinking with the preamble proposal.

EAO: What would a `.match` alternative do?

RGN: I don‚Äôt have an alternative to `.match`. I think the grammar makes more sense. Having this explicit dependency on what the statement can be followed by. I‚Äôm proposing a simpler model.

APP: Conceptually that makes sense, especially for a programming language, but what we have now is that the end consists of a quoted pattern or key-prefixed variants. I don‚Äôt think we need more variance of syntax.

EAO: Extending syntax would require brackets around variant keys.

RGN: I don‚Äôt believe that‚Äôs the case. If there‚Äôs a `.match`, that‚Äôs going to terminate any preceding statement, reserved or otherwise. The statement ends when it sees a quoted pattern, or it carries through all the way. You‚Äôre going to get a syntax error unless that statement is made to be match-like.


APP: We should carry discussion to #547.

EAO: Would you be okay with landing the PR that I filed, even if we temporarily removed reserved-statement until a followup adds it back in?

RGN: Yes, and I think I‚Äôve already approved it.

## Update the rest of the spec to match the ABNF after adding `.keywords` #548

APP: I propose we merge #548, which updates the spec files for consistency with recent ABNF changes. I believe all comments have been addressed, either with changes or by opening issues.

RGN: I haven‚Äôt looked at the most recent tweaks, but I think it was in pretty good shape. No objection to merging.

## Naming of FunctionExpression (#548 comment)

See this comment thread for context. This discussion will be timeboxed.

EAO: We currently represent all annotations as ‚Äúfunc‚Äù, including those that are private-use and reserved. A _supported_ private-use annotation should show up in data model extension, but a reserved annotation or _unsupported_ private-use annotation by definition could not. The names are not especially visible, but they do appear.

APP: We have two kinds of reserved things‚Äîstatements and annotations. We‚Äôre talking here about annotations, which appear in expressions with sigils other than `:`. EAO is proposing renaming interfaces in the data model to correspond with the ABNF.

EAO: Clarification, this is RGN‚Äôs suggestions.

APP: I suggested later adding private-use annotations separately.

STA: What is reserved again?

APP: Anything we‚Äôve reserved. As opposed to private-use, which is open for implementation innovation.

STA: An implementation that advertises support for private-use would need to expose such information in the data model, but error out for unsupported private-use or reserved annotations.

APP: Back on topic, do we want to rename FunctionExpression to AnnotationExpression?

STA: This may be related to markup, but I don‚Äôt object to the change now.

EAO: How do change advocates imagine an implementation supporting private-use to represent instances thereof? What we currently expect is extension of the data model, but if you don‚Äôt like that then what shape would you imagine?

APP: If we renamed as suggested, that resolves some of the challenge. That is less true with the FunctionExpression name, because a private-use annotation may not be function-like.

STA: To answer EAO, it should be possible to use a discriminated union type. I like renaming to AnnotationExpression. Is there a reason why that would not be a good idea?

EAO: I think the question is whether supported private use goes in what is now called FunctionExpression, or whether it belongs one level up.

STA: I have strong feelings in favor of a discriminated union, one way or the other.

APP: RGN, want to PR this?

RGN: Sure, I can do a PR.

EAO: What you‚Äôre describing might already be there, but please take a look.

STA: Is there a specific use case to help me understand?

EAO: An inline comment.

STA: Do we have a design doc on reservations and private use?

APP: We‚Äôre sure spending a lot of time on things no one can use. üôÇ

## Clarify fallback resolution #539

APP: A fallback value is used in place of expressions that fail to resolve, including reserved and unsupported private-use annotations.

STA: I like the proposed ÔøΩ-prefixing for all fallbacks, and would even like ÔøΩ-wrapping.

EAO: I think the curly braces suffice without introducing a heavy (and even doubled!) symbol like ÔøΩ.

MIH: That symbol means character corruption, and is also not really searchable for those encountering an issue.

ECH: I agree with MIH. U+FFFD is used for e.g. invalid octets encountered in UTF-8 decoding, and we‚Äôre not using it for that purpose‚Ä¶ it‚Äôs inappropriately overloading semantics from Unicode.

STA: I don‚Äôt think the ‚Äúcopy and search‚Äù argument holds up. But if we‚Äôre serious about dropping ÔøΩ, we would need to come up with something else for the ultimate fallback case.

EAO: Can we talk about the core question of fallback values for reserved and private-use expressions? This is customizable by implementations anyway, so we shouldn‚Äôt need to specify peeking in to their contents.

APP: I‚Äôm hearing lack of support for emitting ÔøΩ when unnecessary.

RGN: I‚Äôm hearing three possibilities for unsupported, private use, and reserved. ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt peek at all, it‚Äôs the fallback‚Äù, ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt peek at all, it‚Äôs the sigil‚Äù, and ‚Äúuse an initial identifier if found‚Äù

APP: The last option is most useful to debuggers.

RGN: If it starts with an identifier, then we can start to do something. But if it doesn‚Äôt, then we can provide the fallback.

APP: We can make the text say ‚Äúmay‚Äù.

RGN: Yes.

EAO: Because we want to limit information leakage, we should not trust that a post-sigil character that looks like an identifier is safe to expose. I like using the sigil alone.

STA: Could we just not have an opinion?

APP: We can allow variation, but should probably make a recommendation. We must emit something.

RGN: I‚Äôm convinced by the argument that we don‚Äôt know enough to provide any detailed information. We can provide a sigil and a breadcrumb of information, but any further insight is up to the user to discover.

STA: Something like `{&}` doesn‚Äôt really look like an error, is it that much better than `{ÔøΩ}`?

APP: It‚Äôs better for developers.

APP: Any opposition to using the sigil?

APP: Hearing none, resolved.

## Registry Locale Overrides (#534)

Discuss the registry‚Äôs handling of locale-base variation and locale matching. The PR needs some edits following recent conversation but is mostly in good shape. Topic to ensure WG visibility. This discussion will be timeboxed.

EAO: I think we want to follow CLDR for locale matching, even if that differs from BCP 47.

MIH: To be clear on what CLDR does and and precise with wording, what you are referring to is called fallback. You might also call it inheritance. The notion of locale matching is a very different concept, which is finding a result that is the best effort resolution between requested locales and available locales.

APP: The value of having this in a registry is that tool can consume it. We don‚Äôt want e.g. plural rules in the registry as anything other than a reference to something standard.

MIH: For initial population, I found the need to point to a URL for referencing external specifications.

APP: Machine readability is important, but we need a way to say something like ‚Äúplural rules here‚Äù.

EAO: I filed an issue for referring to external data, which needs its own discussion.

EAO: I think discussion ended with me requesting a suggestion from APP on how to match CLDR.

## Define function aliases (#532)

Discuss adding function aliases such as `:integer` for `:number`. This should be non-controversial?? This discussion will be timeboxed.

MIH: This sounds like something that I had previously attempted to define when drafting the EM proposal, but I didn‚Äôt include. I still see the value in doing this, so I approve.

## Discussion of unquoted literals (#518, #519)

Discuss what contents should be permitted in an unquoted literal. Please review issue #518 for relevant discussion. This discussion will be timeboxed.

APP: Still concern about what can be unquoted, and if that should vary for operands vs. option values. Current proposal includes non-namespaced colon-free names, and then special cases for numbers and possibly datetimes.

EAO: Note that unquoted literals can appear in three places: as operands, option values, or variant key values. One thing to consider is whether constraints should match for all three.

APP: I have made the argument that operands and options ‚Äúwant to be the same‚Äù; it doesn‚Äôt make sense to me that `|`-wrapping would be necessary for the same value in one place but not the other. Variant keys could be considered separately, but minimizing differences is good for developers.

STA: I don‚Äôt see much use for unquoted operands. Use of the same production is good, but there is a cost in operand position: an unquoted operand can look like a keyword/command/etc.

STA: I think EAO wants to make things less weird, which is good (even if we disagree on what that means). But I‚Äôm concerned about unquoted being complex such that it is not clear what is allowed and what isn‚Äôt. It would be better to be very restrictive (e.g., only ASCII) or discoverable (e.g., anything that would not introduce parsing ambiguity). I‚Äôd love to see examples.

RGN: I want to strongly advocate for consistency. It would be terrible for me if the resolution to this requires new productions to the grammar. We could require operands to always be quoted, if that‚Äôs how we go. I just don‚Äôt want different syntax for options versus placeholder literals. If we need a new name, that‚Äôs fine. But if we can get away without doing that, that would be more straightforward. I feel less strongly about that than the consistency. If a particular value can be unquoted somewhere, then it should be allowed to be unquoted anywhere that quotes are not required.

APP: I like `name` for that reason, but we do want numbers as well.

STA: I agree on numbers, but I don‚Äôt think we need non-numbers.

APP: We‚Äôve been untyped until now, but introducing dates is an option.

EAO: I just remembered a fourth place where literals appear: in fallback values. So for instance, an unquoted operand gets quoted in representation of `{42 :nosuchfunction}` as `{|42|}`.

EAO: Datetimes are complex. I want to support unquoted numbers and things like ‚Äútrue‚Äù and ‚Äúfalse‚Äù, but the rest is a bit much.

MIH: What if we restricted it to numbers?

APP: Lots of options take a keyword, and requiring quotes there would be burdensome.

STA: If no one else thinks unquoted operands are confusable with special behavior, then I will withdraw that concerns.

APP: I‚Äôm hearing support for numbers and support for some kinds of identifiers.

EAO: I‚Äôd be fine with a name, since it does not include `:`.

APP: Is there an objection to name ‚à™ number?

RGN: One thing to note about that number production is that it does not allow a leading plus sign (`+`). JSON gets away with it, and we can allow it in MF2.0. `name` doesn‚Äôt allow `+` anywhere. It is a potential concern if people think that they can replace a leading `-` (ex: in a number) with a leading `+`.  Allowing unquoted numbers seems fine to me. That excludes support for dates and times, but with those, there is enough going on that requiring them to be quoted seems fine to me.

APP: Any objections?

APP: Hearing none, resolved.

## Should we remove unresolved options from the map? (#545)

Discuss what to do with unresolved options.

## Implementation of code mode introducer

Discuss merging the syntax.md and formatting.md text proposed in #548 and then iterating the prose.

## Open/close/spannables: where are we?

Let‚Äôs discuss the design document and progress we‚Äôve made here.

**ACTION**: Please think about whether spannables must always include namespaces. Review design doc for spannables.

## Format to Parts (#463)

Discuss how to handle format to parts and whether to include it in our specification as informative, normative, or what.

(discussion)



## Topic: Open Issue Review
## Topic: Active PR review

|  PR  |                                   Description                                   |         Recommendation         |
|:----:|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:------------------------------:|
| #548 | Update specification to match ABNF                                              | Merge and iterate              |
| #545 | Formatting: don‚Äôt remove unresolved options from the map passed to the function | Discuss                        |
| #542 | Document option questions around standalone markup                              | Merge with edits               |
| #541 | Accept open/close design doc                                                    | Merge                          |
| #539 | Clarify fallback resolution                                                     | Merge with edits               |
| #534 | Refactor registry locale overrides                                              | Merge (discuss topic above)    |
| #533 | Include input and option descriptions as data in registry                       | Merge                          |
| #532 | Define function aliases in registry, initially including `:integer`             | Merge (discuss topic above)    |
| #502 | Make option values optional, defaulting to true                                 | Discuss                        |
| #473 | Expand expression attributes proposal                                           | Discuss                        |
| #471 | (Design) Number Selection                                                       | Discuss with #532              |
| #463 | (Design) Formatted Parts                                                        | Discuss                        |
| #450 | Define @attributes on expressions                                               | Discuss                        |
| #438 | Add details to ‚ÄúMissing Selector Annotation error‚Äù section                      | Needs work?                    |
| #399 | Add negative-start rule                                                         | Discuss (see #518 topic above) |

* The recommendation "discuss" is to ensure there is WG consensus before merging. The recommendation "merge with edits" is to merge once existing comments have been addressed.

## Topic: Open Issue Review

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues
Currently we have 62 open (was 62 last time).
7 are resolved-candidate and proposed for close.
3 are Agenda+ and proposed for discussion.

| Issue |           Status           |            Description            |                  Chair's Recommendation                 |
|:-----:|:--------------------------:|:---------------------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------:|
| #547  | Agenda+                    | Consider reserve syntax some more | Approve making reserved declaration only                |
| #537  | Agenda+                    | [Discussion] {{Spannables}}       |                                                         |
| #519  | Agenda+                    | Name syntax should align with XML | Close as part of #518/519 discussion above              |
| #518  | Agenda+                    |                                   | See above                                               |
| #425  | Agenda+, resolve-candidate | Selection method expectations     | Close in favor of specific issues                       |
| #376  | Agenda+                    | Allow constraints on arguments    | Reject                                                  |
| #375  | Agenda+                    | What‚Äôs left to discuss on markup? | Close (we have a design document and discussion thread) |

## Topic: AOB?
