# 07 August 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees

- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro (EAO)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Ujjwal Sharma (USA)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)

Scribe: MRR

To request that the chair add an issue to the agenda, add the label Agenda+ To request that the chair add an agenda item, send email to the message-format-wg group email.
Topic: Agenda Review

## Call for topics

EAO - Sigil expiration

## Topic: Info Share

EAO - Thoroughly refactored intl-messageformat proposal
The Intl.MF API refactoring PR: https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-messageformat/pull/22
Topic: Action Item Review

APP: provide pro/con comparison for immutability/namespacing discussion

Still open - Could do with input from STA

## Topic: Active PR review

Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call.
The recommendation "discuss" is to ensure there is WG consensus before merging. The recommendation "merge with edits" is to merge once existing comments have been addressed.
Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call.

#447

MIH - Depending on how you look at the function registry, the examples are correct either way. Show examples in both ways?

#444

EAO - Rather than data model entry being reserved, call it unsupported. More inclusive. Change reserved to unsupported so we can merge now? APP - Agree.

#443

STA - Good change. Use case from Mozilla - parse and serialize, keeping quotes. Different data model but something to add to wish list?

EAO - That’s an implementation, internal thing.

APP - Going to merge this.

#441

STA - Liked it - no further feedback.

APP - Merging.

#440

APP - I had this down as discuss because I was dissatisfied with it.

STA - Not a fan of the proposal. The ABNF doesn’t have to map directly to the data model. Separate variable reference/name/declaration. If the goal is to make things easier to name, maybe that’s good enough.

EAO - No strong opinions. When talking about how you’re using a declaration, being able to explicitly refer to the name of the declaration, it would solve that problem.

APP - Concern - isn’t that name a variable? Name production describes syntactic restrictions. Giving the LHS a dollar sigil makes it readable.

EAO - If we give it the variable sigil, it’s not clear if we’re talking about the LHS or RHS. I’m concerned about someone new to MessageFormat tracking what’s going on and understanding what the spec is meant to say.

APP - Not forgetting that there are external variables that are not declared.

STA - Is there middle ground:

```
variable-declaration = let s variable-name [s] "=" [s] expression
variable-reference = variable-name
variable-name = "$" name
```

EAO - Unclear if variable name includes dollar sign. Otherwise, fine with that.

APP - Confuses me more. When coming to a new programming language, is this a common problem?

MIH - I never question @ as part of the name. My brain would exclude $ by default.

STA - I never thought about variables as only references to something.

MIH - That’s one of the things that throws me off. It’s not like a normal assignment, it’s like a pointer to.

STA - It’s not a reference, it’s just a variables. That’s why I’m not a fan.

APP - Sounds like we’re not in favour. No outright rejection - let’s leave this for next time. I’ll put a note in the PR.

#439

APP - I recommended that we merge.

MIH - I don’t see the use for this. JSON is a serialization form - we have a serialization form. Why bother?

EAO - We care because, given the TypeScript structure, we’ve already defined it. “Have this ready thing and use it.”. There are use cases to exchanging the parsed structure, rather than the MF2 syntax.

USA - Not going to be doable in icu4c. That’s OK from a browser perspective but if it’s required for all implementations, it’s not doable.

MIH - We just don’t need it. Is it our business as a group to define a representation in all interchange formats?

APP - It’s formative, not normative. “Here’s this thing defined in a couple of ways.” We could allow people to contribute these things.

EAO - Data model is optional to all implementations. This PR is presenting the JSON schema in a different way to the previous PR. These are entirely informative. One of our deliverables.

MIH If I don’t like the JSON and I do my own thing, I’m not aligned with the spec now. We have no business specifying it. Should be “If you like it, look at it and take it.”

STA - Maybe we should have a new directory in the repository (e.g. “guidelines”). I don’t care much about exact naming. I don’t mind if we recommend ‘shape’.

APP - We need to deliver a data model. We can make certain expressions non-normative. “We can’t make you, but if you make your own, you’re at the risk of not being compatible.”

EAO - This PR creates a new directory for data model. Not sure what else the data model spec text should say.

EAO - Propose merging.

MIH - Not opposing.

APP - Has conflicts but I’ll merge after meeting.

STA - Last time, we said we’d merge the data model .MD. This PR puts all three files in a new directory….
Suggest data model in ‘spec’, other files in ‘info’ or ‘guidelines’ outside ‘spec’. We can move to spec once we’re sure that they are spec.

EAO - What is the shape that this text might take when we publish it? My expectation is something like an annex.

APP - OK to merge and split out informative text afterwards?

MIH - If the data model changes, we have to keep this up-to-date. It is yet another thing to maintain. Feels rushed.

APP - Any change to the syntax would be represented in these files.

EAO - I’m happy to take on the task of applying changes to the data model.

APP - Except for errata, we’d stabilise these. Let’s timebox.

#438
APP - Outstanding comments from EAO. Propose not to look at today.

#435

STA - We have enough meaning for “pattern” already. No change in functionality.

EAO - +1 on the change.

APP - When you’ve done the changes, we’ll update and merge before the next call.

#434

STA - 2 parts. In MIH PR, already fixed some DTF bugs apart from one. This PR fixes it (registry element, I think). Also wanted to use this PR to have an explicit discussion about using DTD. Has to be ordered sequence. Input has to come first, options second. It’s just a current limitation of DTD.

APP - I think we can merge. Please resolve conflicts.

#432

STA - I think we wanted to wait and get others to look.

APP - Is that implicit approval?

STA - There were some concerns about this change: Accepted keys. It makes it harder for mini-DSLs to exist (e.g. selector for <11).

APP - There’s an infinite number of values < 11.

EAO - It’s possible to create, dependent on a boolean condition. That’s what we’ve built into this language to solve this problem.

APP - One extant example is choice-format. I don’t know that we want to implement that, but there is at least one example. Some of the datetime operators might want to do before and after.

EAO - Before/after are possible. It’s when we’re talking about infinite ranges. Any choice format is representable, so we’re not losing compatibility without this change.

APP - Do we want to merge?

MIH - No. It’s flexibility that I’d like to keep.

STA - I’m also against merging. Simplifying the selection algorithm is a good idea. Not convinced mini-DSLs are a good thing but maybe we should see if people do them - Throwing out the baby with the bath water.

EAO - The cost of keeping the spec is that we allow for duck typing using MF2 selectors.

APP - I have sympathy for not being over-specific around how implementations work.

EAO - Simpler API I’m proposing is workable as selection method that does not cut out the possibility for mini DSLs e.g. under 10.

STA - If we require implementations to follow selection algorithm, there may be performance implications.

APP - Sounds like we’re not ready to merge.

MIH - An example other than choice is plural. I can say whatever I want, it’s not limited. I can’t make it work how MF1 did. (in MF1 one can do =1, =101, =3.1416, etc)

APP - Timebox?

#412

EAO - Need Tim for this. Let’s skip.

## Topic: Sigils, immutability, naming

@stasm has produced a draft discussing requirements for open/close, function naming, etc. This appears to be a useful starting point for a discussion. See here: https://github.com/stasm/message-format-wg/blob/sigils/exploration/sigils.md

See #449 for a proposal from Addison Phillips to put open/close out of scope for MF2 1.0.

EAO - What we achieved we agreement on was the syntax but not explicitly defining what they mean other than they can use a function with open/close. I don’t think we need to define more than what we have already. Would like to have it in the release.

STA - I became frustrated about the volume of discussion vs volume of requirements and agreement. This is underspecified. We should remove for now but there are items that are very important for some people. We should try to focus on them. I don’t know how much time we have to agree though.

MIH - Always against the fact that open/close are properties of functions. They are properties of the placeholders. I liked where we got in the meeting with STA on Friday. Would really like to have open/close in first release.

APP - We need to understand the requirements and work from there. We don’t have any open/close functions at present. There are disagreements about the form of open/close, open/close vs markup-detection. This sounds like a place we’d spend a great deal of time. Is it strictly necessary? We wouldn’t push them into ‘reserve’, push them into ‘soon’.

EAO - The messages I care about: 1. have a named variable reference in a message. 2nd most common: - markup - the use case I have for open/close. About 7% of all the messages I’m working with at Mozilla, especially with the level of agreement we have. It works fine and we should not be getting rid of open/close.

APP - If we want to keep it in scope, that’s fine but we need to solve all the problems, even if it’s a temporary solution. It needs to be enough that people can implement and we don’t then break what we ship in the near-term.

STA - It’s true we agreed to current form but not the most enthusiastic agreement in the group. ‘Leaky’ solution with questions that we don’t have answers to. Maybe more of a documentation issue? Revert decision about markup? Want to make conscious decisions rather than just building on top.

EAO - Would continue to argue for, even if it pushes us past the deadline. It’s one of the core improvements. No incentive to progress without this.

APP - We’re talking speculatively.

EAO - I have an implementation, which is entirely reliant on having open/close.

APP - Rough consensus in running code. If we can solve the problem, I am 100% for having this. Don’t want to change the syntax if we don’t have to.

STA - We can remove markup from the scope of 2.0 but I’m hearing an adamant no from EAO and MIH. There’s the question of removing the current implementation of markup - making a mental note that we need to do something about it. We still have custom functions to fake it with HTML.open and HTML.close. It’s less good - open/close concepts we want to be in the syntax, not properties in the registry. We want tools without access to the registry to be aware of the concepts (MIH’s earlier comment).

MIH - On Friday - discussed with STA about the @ sigil. Eat the @ instead of eating the +/-. It doesn’t change the current syntax and ideas in big ways.

EAO - Too many symbols. If all messages that we currently have, what are the frequencies of the sigils that we currently have, what is the most used. First - $, second - +/-, after that, : [colon]. Must be as ergonomic as possible. MIH is suggesting “annotations” for annotation…

APP - Need a plan as well as requirements. Falls into the function registry space.

MIH - In terms of most common sigils, we don’t have the concept of open/close so it’s difficult to measure. Of course, let’s make as ergonomic as possible. I don’t see this as being resolved.

STA - PR is currently a brain-dump. 3 questions to answer:
How important is it that open/close are understood without the registry. Literally encode as keywords in the spec?
What concept carries the open/closed property in the spec. Each carries consequences.
Are open/closed the only things that we want to express like this.

EAO - [Missed context here] Response to MIH on +b: Either approach can be implemented. Thing it’s opening is not a variable… We have a function construct now - sigil + name... We should call it a function signature registry, not a function registry. It’s defining the interfaces.

APP - If everybody does their own implementation, are we achieving interoperability? Is there anything we want to put in the default registry?

EAO - My choice would be to not include any open/close functions in the standard registry. We have disagreement. This could be resolved by specific registries on top of this. Custom functions like ‘:number’ ‘:selector’ can be fed in. In order to use +/-, you need to format and post-process the parts and a post-process that is able to build HTML. I can share what I’m intending to do in the JavaScript implementation - to leave it to users to build on top of that implementation.

APP - I’m nervous to have a feature if we have no implementation whatsoever. I understand what you’re saying about having a different level of processor. Amazon, we moved away from HTML to semantic markup - I could see implementors like that… It seems odd to say that MF2 would just pass through curly bracket garbage. That’s the purpose of MF.

MIH - Thumbs down to just passing through +/-. It feels really wrong if image is not. It’s really function-specific.

STA - I’m with MIH. We were hoping functions would be generic enough - they can be markup. Now we’ve added this special thing for markup (open/close). Counter to the idea that functions are [multi-purpose]. Indicates open/close should be part of the syntax. We need to consider whether function/annotation/expression/placeholder. Start with placeholder and see how many requirements it fulfiles, expression/annotation/function. It won’t get to function. This is one exercise I’d imagined for us. Meet in person and whiteboard?

EAO - Consider the role the implementations are taking in the stack. Icu2c, icu2j, JS intl-messageformat. These are the foundational building blocks for the user-facing things. Given this, and that we have defined a handler for +html or +bold is going to get just that expression, not that and the following contents. To build something, you’re going to need to format to a sequence of parts, then merge with separate sequences of parts. What do implementations look like at the lowest level? On STA’s HTML comment, it cannot work that way. We have no place in the structure that can take the whole structure of formatted parts in.

_Discussion on collaboration_

MIH - Propose a huddle in the next two weeks. We have a couple of PRs with very little consensus (e.g. vertical pipe to apostrophe), we argue and then drop. There would be less friction if we have more general agreement first.

APP - Higher-bandwidth comms mechanism is necessary. If we can do something faster than face-to-face, let’s do that. We should think about ways to pull our consensus together. Maybe some ad-hoc meetings in the next two weeks?

STA - Yes to ad-hoc. Likes meeting face-to-face but not in the next two weeks. Comparison table for selection methods helped in the past. You can have a table, consider different dimensions then rate/score. We’ll need to answer many other questions to answer this one.

EAO - Can’t make call in two weeks time. Don’t like ad-hoc. Move to weekly meetings? More discussion in GitHub comments? Get together October-ish to pull this all together?

MIH - GitHub comments is lower bandwidth.

APP - Consider face-to-face. I’ll set up a poll. We need a mix of meetings and offline discussion. Comparison doc as source of discussion would be useful. If so, we’d want to timebox a bit more.

EHO - 2 hours a week is not enough.

APP - A 2 hour meeting is not always as productive. We can up the bandwidth when we have something of substance.

STA - Would like to help on comparison doc. Not much time until September.
I want syntax changes to be an afterthought. Conscious decision, not happenstance.

MIH - Don’t care about syntax changes. We have PRs that we submit without full agreement. We end up with things in the registry without full agreement. If we do this, it should be easy to change.

## Actions

- F2F @ W3C TPAC in Seville
- Meetings to be weekly
- ACTION: addison: comparo matrix for +/-
