# 04 September 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
* Addison Phillips- Unicode (APP) - chair
* Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
* Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
* Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
* Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
* Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
* Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)

**Scribe:** USA

To request that the chair add an issue to the agenda, add the label Agenda+ To request that the chair add an agenda item, send email to the message-format-wg group email.

## Topic: Agenda Review

EAO: Plan to talk to extensions group to get them to adopt MFv2.

STA: Trying to make as much room as I can, should be able to dedicate two full days.

## Topic: Info Share

EAO: Wanted to mention the DOM localization session but I already mentioned it earlier.


## Topic: Active PR review
Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call.

### #465 and #414

APP: I made some comments on #465 and there’s a few more comments by others so we can merge with the suggested edits.

EAO: If we’re not doing #414, spending time on this is wasteful. As I originally promised, I’m proposing the text but would like you to make changes so that it works for you.

APP: No controversy involved, it’s simple editorial work.

STA: Should we make the edits?

EAO: I’d like for you to take over. I don’t like this choice but I’m not going to fight it, so I’d ask you to flesh out the explanation for this.

STA: Maybe this is the job for a retroactive design doc, if you feel strongly about it.

APP: <fill me>

STA: We don’t tend to put things like the detailed rationale inside the spec, so a design doc should be useful in this case.

### #466
APP: The title may not be correct because the abnf is opinionated in a different way.

MIH: Making the change, I realized it’s tied to the open/close discussions which is one of the remaining open questions.

APP: You can say that it’s an attribute but we don’t know what that quite means yet. We need to address all of these open questions but it would help if there was atleast one open/close function in the registry.

EAO: I think I raised last week that for this to progress, someone needs to write a design doc. It’s unclear who will write this.

APP: The problem is that the current consensus is to have open and close sigils and that’s pretty much it.

EAO: Another detail of the compromise consensus we have is that the attribute is…
Given how I would like them to work in JS which is more restrictive  than we allow here, I can volunteer to write up on how they’d work but not the entire design doc.

MIH: I thought of another agreement: the open and close functions in the registry should be allowed to take different signatures; would it be one function with different signatures for open and close or two different functions.

STA: To repeat what I wrote in a comment minutes ago, to distinguish between function properties and …, that’s how we managed to get to the point where the requirement …

APP: Based on people’s different understanding, I hear different opinions. There’s a lot of open questions.

STA: To potentially stir the hornet’s nest, we are going to have a bunch of high bandwidth time during the next week. What if we remove open/close for a month and try to design something from scratch. What we have currently is a bit haphazard for the tech preview but perhaps we can design things better.

EAO: We have space to redesign but not in favor of temporarily removing. It’s an implementation question whether it’s a single function or two. The function registry we have currently is more about interfaces rather than actual functions but this is probably a bit deep into semantics and we can get into it later.

APP: I don’t want to go through the effort of pulling things out of the spec and into PRs because that’s not a great use of time. I agree that we should write down the requirements and agree on them and then go on to satisfy those requirements. We need to care about more things than which sigils to use. A challenge is that we haven’t done that for open and close functions since we don’t understand them fully so we don’t know what to put in there. We also have a lot more to finalize on the functions side of things so that’s also a big priority. Part of me is sympathetic to STA’s idea, and I even proposed that at some point but at this point I don’t want to go ahead with it.

STA: I’m not proposing removing it from scope, I’m just talking about removing it from the spec and redo it. That said, we don’t have to do it. That said, I’d like to write the design doc from the base without preexisting open/close. We could collaborate on that.

APP: Could we focus on just the requirements? That would help us have a strong discussion about how to cover them more effectively.

EAO: Two things: I’m happy for the design document being based on a fresh base but I won’t be in favor of removing it from the spec before we agree on a solution.

APP: it is helpful to have concrete proposals. When we theorize without something tangible it’s not the most productive. Just what you described would be super useful.

EAO: Noting that what I’m describing exists. There is a PR in the TC39 proposal regarding open/close and the semantics of the PR are implemented in the polyfill. So a spec and implementation already exist.

APP: …

EAO: Other than me does someone have use cases they’d like to document?

_others volunteer_

STA: We’re going to start the requirements doc, we don’t have to remove anything from the spec just yet.

APP: So we agree that we’re going to start writing requirements from scratch and then go from there?

STA: Do we want to do some homework before we meet?

### #458
ETA: Regarding attributes, can we go ahead and merge it?

APP: Yes, let’s do that.

### #457

USA: Any other comments on the builtins design doc?


### #456
APP: No new comments on this.

EAO: IIRC, I have approved it but others haven’t yet weighed in.

APP: I haven’t seen anything else, any objections to merging it today?

APP: Let’s go ahead and merge that.

### #463

EAO: Anything else on that?

APP: I made some comments which weren’t addressed.

EAO: Yes, I want to request others to go through it so we can address them and land it. Another request was to flesh out the use cases but this is also something I’d love some input/feedback from others. This isn’t something that is required, but it’s informed by my experience from designing the JS API. If you have anything similar, I’d love to discuss them but I haven’t seen any. Mostly I’m interested in comments from everyone.

APP: I think that’s the right approach. My experience with formatToParts influences my comments and one of them is that implementations need to find out information about and order of parts so you could pick out the right template.

MIH: ICU has something for other formatters, but not for MF but for DateFormat it produces something similar so I imagine MFv2 could use something similar. The API is horrible though, it’s inherited from Java.

APP: MessagePattern has something similar too.

EAO: Really valuable would be an investigation into how those APIs work and how MFv2 would build on top of that to see if that could be implemented in ICU.

MIH: The requirements are clear, the formatToParts shape would be similar to other alternatives so it can play nicely.

APP: One important question would be how deeply nested these parts can be.

EAO: …

APP: I think the important discussion we were having previously was

MIH: The argument I tried making before was that you cannot really do that. You can’t even have a linear sequence of parts. Both Android and ICU work using ranged attributes because they can overlap.

EAO: A really valuable thing here would be for someone who’s a domain expert and tell if there’s some way in which this interface would not be able to generate an attributed string that could work this way.

STA: Is this typically implemented using offsets instead through yielding strings?

MIH: Yes, that’s how it works in Android but I’ll go through the APIs.

APP: Will the challenge with attributed strings be that they would define a range an attribute would apply to, but the question is: is it the right design to have all these overlapping attributes in a string?

EAO: And a particular challenge with an attributed string is that there’s a number of representations that you cannot get via attribute strings because some of the parts are objects that need to respect identity.

MIH: When I did the formatToParts spec, it was so vague that wasn’t particularly easy. For example, for a browser, the parts could be in the form of a DOM tree. That’s why I’m reluctant to go for an attribute string.

EAO: That’s why we can make this normative optional and this way you could go for an attributed string and just be explicit about this.

APP: If we have non normative stuff, it’s nice to have, but we could also just throw it on a shelf.

EAO: So the intent with the design is to provide a baseline that would allow implementations to format to X interface. What you could do internally would be to produce the format from the formatted parts. That said, is there any use case that won’t be catered to using this.

MIH: But I want my alternate format to be the formatted parts. I would read the doc.

### Topic: AOB?



—

### Verbatim chat:


(none)
