# 2023-06-05 MFWG Teleconference

### Attendees

- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)

**Scribe:** RGN (until 10:00 Pacific)

### Topic: Agenda Review

No changes

### Topic: Info Share

EAO: Demo of TextMate-based syntax highlighting
EAO: TextMate applies rules one line at a time, but some of the grammar is actually tricky to get write (for example, `let`, because there’s no clear “end” indication)
EAO: It’s currently doing a full reparse on every change and feeling fast enough, but supporting incremental parsing will be needed later on.

### Topic: Action Item Review

APP to check on license for software, test suite
EAO: Which license will carry the ABNF?
APP: It should be under Software & Data.
ECH: The license since 2016 is based on MIT. It is being redone recently to be based on Apache. Don’t quote me on that because I’m not a lawyer. That’s my understanding of how permissive it is.

## Topic: Function Registry (continued)

Requested by: STA
Discussion of the function registry. Two of the three models had sections on this.

## Topic: Active PR review

Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call.

| PR   | Description                         | Recommendation               |
| ---- | ----------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| #315 | Bidi support                        | Discuss (see below)          |
| #364 | Replace `nmtoken` with `unquoted`   | Merge with edits             |
| #368 | Draft of registry                   | Discuss                      |
| #381 | Variable overrides                  | Merge                        |
| #382 | Literal Resolution                  | Merge                        |
| #385 | Clarifications to pattern selection | Merge (discussion to follow) |

The recommendation "discuss" is to ensure there is WG consensus before merging. The recommendation "merge with edits" is to merge once existing comments have been addressed.
#364 has a long comment from @aphillips with proposed text

## Topic: Variable declaration overrides

MIH: I have a concern about external variables.
APP: Right now, “external variables” refers to the argument map, which are distinct from variables defined in `let` statements.
STA: The shadowing mechanism is a potential hazard; a local “$bar” shadows later addition of a “bare” external argument.
APP: Decision time: do we merge now or defer?
TIM: I won’t block, but I agree with MIH that it adds significant complexity with respect to clear semantics.
EAO: I would be very surprised if this results in user issues.
… what is the use of this …
APP: not ready to merge. Discuss and bring it back next session

## 382 Add Literal Resolution section to formatting

Merged

## 385 : Clarifications to pattern selection

Merged

## 364 Replace nmtoken with unquoted

Merge.
To solve: negative numbers

## 368 Draft of the registry specification

Merge, good as a first iteration.

Action item: STA will file issues for the known comments.

## 315 Add Bidirectional Isolation section to formatting

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/315

Discussion of bidirectional text handling.

EAO: very much implementation dependent.
One implementation may defined several methods of handling bidi, but at least one of them should allow for isolation.
An optimized implementation might not emit bidi control characters when not needed.

## Formatting to parts

Not strong language, implementation specific
Flat list vs hierarchies.

// this meeting's notes are incomplete

## Topic: AOB?
