Mar 31, 2023 | MessageFormat special session

### Attendees

- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Simon Clark - Oracle (SCL)

Scribe: ECH, APP

# Agenda:

## Topic: Agenda Review

## Topic: Info Share

EAO: PR [#371](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/371) and PR [#372](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/372) are available to review.

## Topic: Action Items

## Topic: Progress and Suggestions for improving progress

APP: We have spent a lot of time talking about things without concretizing things, ex: in the form of PRs, etc. Some of those discussions are necessary, ex: to get a better understanding of the alternatives for selection. Maybe we would make better progress by creating PRs for spec text and reading about and discussing the specifics of those. What do people think?

STA: I like the idea of \_\_\_\_. Now that we have ABNF for the spec, it should be easier. I like the PR #371 that is a holistic PR in that it also adjusts the syntax accordingly.

EAO: Our selection discussion comes from my PR about selection, where we didn’t have a shared or complete understanding, so we have to discuss. How do you propose

ECH: THis meeting is addressing what we’re doing better now than in the past. We kind of get lost in some of the details of the discussion. We need to address some of the pros/cons (higher level). We have a tendency to get lost in the details. Also speaks to some things are not agreed to and thus not on solid ground. Could be moving faster. Can we prioritize things? If we have discussion of markup before details like sigils.

MIH: Thank you APP for our good progress lately. To move forward with written pull requests, I think that works well when we have a good general agreement. But for a topic like selection where you could have different pull requests, one for the soring option, one for the column-first option, one for the first-match option, it wouldn’t make sense to treat them independently. Maybe have a design doc for such issues?

APP: Like PR #362 that I drafted to discuss selection?

STA: Thanks APP for drafting that selection explainer doc. When we had too many small issues, every PR

APP: Would people be okay in merging #362 about selection? No objection, we have consensus.

## Topic: Markup

#356
@mihnita has called out that our decisions about markup might be premature. Meanwhile, based solely on consistency and the ABNF work, @aphillips has a PR adding a markup error. Let's discuss markup.
Markup open issues:
#241
#262
#238

ECH:

EAO: To have data for this argument, about 4-5% of messages in Mozilla have markup in the message.

APP: I have a couple of observations. Mainly in our discussions between EAO and myself, I have been championing the idea of protecting markup so that markup tags can move around the translation process. I didn’t see a lot of value at runtime when, say, formatting to parts. That was one thing. When thinking about the things that you were presenting, EAO, I could think of cases where MF could participate in the markup generation, where a translation could insert attributes about text direction into markup tags. Also, one last thing is XLIFF has features in the markup for describing tags with ids that can support the cases in which tags are separated.

ECH: appreciate the stats, but don’t think that’s totally germane/salient. Google’s translation content is more than 80% markup content, but we don’t have markup in the messages that are hand written. As I mentioned in 356, it’s problematic. There are localization problems that easily arise when you allow markup to be added to a message. Maybe we can have tooling. We can have it, a lot of people have it outside of the messages. Think that if you’re doing that, you have a much cleaner process. You have less complexity. It makes sense … it allows MF to just be about messages. Can also do with markup tags too. Would like to know why this is necessary?

MIH: I think the format we design should support the tagging of parts of the string, say parts of speech. I think we can have this as a separate concept in the spec. My position is that the placeholders have been sufficient, and can benefit from adding a field to represent open/close/standalone. It would be useful to add a function for how to format / generate markup, not just protect markup tags.

STA: I think having functions and formatToParts means that people will produce markup from the translated messages. The question from last meeting is whether we need open/close/standalone, whether that needs special syntax, and whether we need to have functions in the registry. In the past, we have been successful in outsourcing our problems to other layers, but for protecting markup, we don’t know what our compatibility with XLIFF is. Maybe whatever we do when translating

SCL: About 90% of strings that we deliver don’t need MessageFormat, they’re plain strings. So I don’t want to see those messages with markup in them.

EAO: It’s entirely possible to not have consensus at this level. We have concerns horizontally and vertically. We can have syntax and then kick the can down the road to the function registry to deal with. My PR #371 shows that we can have different ways to represent markup tags.

APP: Our current spec allows people to type stuff into the pattern string, except that you have to escape curly braces. So you could type in HTML tags as part of the string. None of that affects your strings. What we’re talking about is whether MF has participation, either for markup protection for for the purposes of generating formatting.

STA: I think #371 is fine as a solution, and I think APP’s idea to reserve sigil prefix syntax is a more general solution. But what I’m missing is a clear statement of the value proposition of why we need the notion of open and close in the syntax in the first place.

MIH: I’m pretty happy with the direction of #371. Regarding what the benefits of open / close. At Google, we have lots of types of content, including types of markup. People invent their own concepts of open and close, but XLIFF has ways of representing

STA: That’s not what I’m asking. What I’m asking is if we need to represent open/close _in the syntax itself_.

MIH: As opposed to putting it in the function registry?

STA: Yes, why not handle it in the function registry?

MIH: If we have it outside of the function registry, then it would be easier for translators to deal with, without having to touch the function registry.

APP: For me, when I look at #371, the `+` and `-` give us a way for a placeholder to span a substring. The concern that I have before is that I don’t want to have to take their strings, translate them into MF-style syntax, and then change their strings according to how it

MIH:

Protected content, no special support needed:

```
Click {|<a href=http://sample.com>|}here{|</a>|} to register.
```

With Eemeli's changes (PR 371):

```
Hello {user}, click {a +html}here{a +html} to continue {img :html src='foo.gif'}!
Your offer expires in {|30| :number} days (on {$expDate :datetime skeleton=yMMMd}).
```

APP: My feeling is that we’re not far from a consensus.

SCL: It would be useful to see what the function signature that responds to this would be, but I am in favour of the proposal.

ECH: I would be okay if the `+` and `-` were just syntax sugar for annotating placeholders that have a specific value for a specific field.

EAO: ECH, look at #371 because the PR is more generic than that. It doesn’t specify behavior, and markup as a term is not used, except to describe one example. But the interpretation of the syntax is implementation specific.
