### Attendees

- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Richard Gibson (RGN)
- Eemeli Aro (EAO)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)

Scribe: Mihai Nita

Action items

- [ ] APP to check on license for software, test suite
- [x] APP to update deliverable wording
- [ ] ALL: read function registry PR
- [ ] NEW: APP: review PRs for next time for commit

# Agenda:

## Topic: Agenda Review

## Topic: Info Share

**Topic:** Action Item Review

**Topic:** Function Registry (continued)

- Requested by: STA
- https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/368

ZBI: tooling, customer of the registry. Provide a good experience for the tools (CAT tools, refactoring, etc).

ZBI: how much if the information about implementation we want / need to include in the registry

EAO: as implementer, expects the functions in the registry to match 100% the ECMAScript style. Plan to have a mapping tooling from various styles.

STA: should not define interaction with tooling

APP: consider an antipattern to have different dialects of MF. It would be ideal to agree on a set of options. Don’t agree the intersection is a zero-sum (all have SHORT, MEDIUM, LONG, for example).

EAO: if the options match it is less maintenance. With transformat

MIH: Agree with Addison. Difficult to

TIM: different layers: does that mean …

STA: the layers mean different registries “overlapping” each other. For example, the number formatter is Unicode wide. Then you might have a company registry, and product registry.

TIM: ECMAScript compat for the option bag: we are talking syntax, or code?

APP: we are talking syntax inside the MF. Example: …{exp, :date, **<the_options_here>**}...

TIM: why can’t we put the conversion in the code?

APP: we can, but it is extra work. And if I am a JS developer then I have to learn another syntax. I am already familiar with the option bags, do we also need to learn about skeletons.

STA: do we expect something more than skeletons and option bags?
And how compatible do we want to be with all kind of languages?
Is that a goal? Portability between programming languages?

EAO: Fluent has functions in its “registry”, and the option bugs are a subset of the ECMAScript ones. Then there are platform specific registries.
For portability we would need to specify what they mean, exactly. How they interact.

EAO: all are implementation defined.

APP: would you be open to have a minimal set of functions?

EAO: yes, as long as that set is the same as ECMAScript one.

MIH: not necessary to resolve all of these to fill. Can start with minimal set, date, number, etc. Would have to specify everything, agree. But we do that in ES and in UAX35 anyway. Won’t be in registry itself. The full explanation of paramaters would be in UAX35-foo or ES-blah. Expect it to grow, since not frozen. When added, in both places, can add to registry. Don/t expect stuff in global registry to shove in stuff that is not stable.meters would be already in some other standard.

APP: at amazon we had our own MF, with custom functions, but MF ICU syntax.
In order to make progress we need to agree on goals.

EAO: what would be the migration path?

APP: existing resource syntax + conversion layer
bind MF2 to the underlying … (implementation?)

EAO: _missing_

STA: no matter what we decide on the minimal set, we need to agree on the schema.
No experience maintaining something like this.

APP: we actually have some experience. LDML data + ICU4C / 4J / 4X + ECMAScript are very very close to each other.

MIH: the current MF group does no have to maintain the registry content. Same as the group that designed BCP 47 is the the group that maintains the IANA Language Registry.

EAO: separate group to specify the minimal / initial set of functions

APP: that’s why we have the registry as a separate deliverable from MF2

APP: can we take Stas’s prototype and iterate on it?
To show that a minimal set can be implemented on top of it.

APP: goal for the next 2 weeks: merge this and do PRs on top of it

### Actions items:

- [ ] APP: go through the PRs, commit / not commit
- [ ] STA: cleanup registry PR

## Topic: AOB?
