# 13 November 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Ujjwal Sharma (USA)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)
- Simon Clark (SC)

Scribe: MRR

## Topic: Agenda Review

## Topic: Info Share

Addison’s UTW Slides as PDF: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1rssYrWk0PmeCE7EeLys750YxOnzNlJZw/view?usp=drive_link

## Topic: Action Item Review

APP: survey for f2f dates (new)
~APP: Provide code mode sigil design - Done~
~MIH: Comment on #463 - Done~

## Topic: Beautification of the Syntax

Having decided the above, changes to remove uglification of the syntax.

Code-Mode Introducer Design: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/521 

STA: We have a choice that we either want to be in code mode by wrapping in something, or we want to have a single special marker at the front. (What the marker looks like is one of the options there). The other options we were missing is where we wrap the statements/declarations, not the entire message, and let patterns follow some other syntax. What if we try to have this conversation on an abstract level about the +/- of each option.

APP: [Need to ask] Can I explain usage? Can we avoid iteration hazards?
I think there is some attractiveness to decorating the exterior. The challenge being, it doesn’t add anything but it’s a tripping hazard. We might end up with a sequence of a lot of [closing] things at the end.
I like the preamble thing a little but then the keys are floating. D is probably where I’d want to land, but that’s just me.

EAO: Option D is the least worst option. Least amount of characters and least amount of weirdness introduced.

STA: Disagree on closing marker being useless. ‘Match’ has unknown arity. A closing marker would help us know where ‘match’ selectors end.
I think we should have a separate discussion about a simple quoted pattern. Is this useful? Can we forbid and just have a single approach?
I’m concerned about the ‘local’. It feels like it’s reasonable but then we end up adding a new sigil.

MIH: I’m more inclined towards E. It doesn’t require us to have another escape. Being required to use an escape in a simple message, as a translator, I don’t know how to escape because I don’t know which API it’s going to go through.

APP: Anything we put at the start is going to have one escape, but maybe it’s fewer things escaped.
Quoting patterns is valid - we don’t require but we permit because it’s syntactically complete. I don’t feel terrible about allowing it - it’s just an unusual usage. Some people have expressed a desire to always quote.

MIH: If quoted patterns were mandatory, the source would have them. If the source is ‘loosey-goosey’, I don’t know if I have to escape it or if I have to have curlies.

ECH: I don’t like any of the options. Option D is the least worst. Instead of looking at one or two characters, we should look at the patterns [inaudible]

STA: I understand about escaping. I had a few thoughts on the value attributed to the requirement. I know it’s important to avoid escaping extras. Where this is likely to be a problem, most editors will be able to correct this.

EAO: We cannot use hash here (with reference to previous discussion). There are way too many formats that consider this to be a comment introducer. A {parser can have an easy time but plenty of humans will be looking at unhighlighted files and will be unable to tell. I think the least worst character is the % sign. It should be sufficiently rare, probably rarer, in localizable text.

USA: I dislike that the argument incentivises us to reuse syntax like the braces. Maybe people will need to escape more things but it would make the syntax less confusing on the whole, which would be a good tradeoff.

APP: Option D, the sigil is not by itself. Unlike other cases, the thing you have to escape is sigil+input sigil+local or sigil+match. This is only likely to be in extreme cases. For me, this is an advantage.
We’ve explored the sigil space. % occurs relatively commonly, relative to other characters we could choose. Any character we can choose could be suboptimal. I suspect . Martin pointed out last week that a pound sign in YAML could be a problem. I’m open to considering other sigils, but attaching to the word gets us out of most of the ‘escapey hell’

MIH: Tools can take care of it. If, as a translator, I only see the text, I have no idea what kind of translation this has to go through. A singular thing like a # is problematic because of that.

APP: Any character you pick will have to be considered.

STA: A typical tool will just wrap inside pattern delimiters. I’m more worried about developers not connecting the dots. I’m not so worried about translators.
What I really like about option F is that it creates this dedicated space for declarations. In a way, it unnests the message again. I like thinking about the message as a map of patterns with some extra front matter, rather than some code with a switch case in it.

EAO: Quoting from syntax design goals. Non-goal: “Making syntax accessible for non technical”. MIH, do we want to make this a goal?

MIH: No, but we want translators to work on it. There was a strong push from Mozilla to have the files hand-edited.

APP: I believe they will but the question is how much affordance do we provide?

MIH: I agree that we have to have a syntax and play within the rules of the syntax. We have to have a way to ‘sniff’ the syntax. E.g. for MF1, they look for curly plurals. All the tool can see is that it’s a string - you don’t know the syntax and the escaping rules. Many strings used by different APIs can live in the same files.

APP: All syntaxes present strong syntaxes.

MIH: Some more than others. By the way, I can live with more than one of the options.

STA: Is it a stated requirement for the syntax to support what MIH is saying? It’s super interesting. (used alongside other syntaxes)

APP: I think that’s a world we will start in. People will want to know how to migrate their messages. If we make choices that make it easier to recognise our syntax, that’s great. I don’t want to make it harder to write a message just to make it easier for the machine to recognise.
Where are we at?
Option A: TIM
Option C: USA
Option D: ECH, EAO, APP
Option E: MIH
Option F: STA

EAO: For ranked choices, can we share the options on screen?

APP: From the options are there any that people can’t live with?

MIH: B

EAO: A

APP: I will ballot us and we can see what we have next week.

MIH: What if we say closing is optional. If it bothers you, close it, we don’t care.

APP: It bothers my tools. The editor will want to match.
It bothers me conceptually.

MIH: It bothers me too.

EAO: Before polling, please change pound signs to something else.

APP: EAO, you wanted %. Is there a better one there? Is @ a good choice.

EAO: ‘dot’

APP: So .input, .local, .match

MIH: No, dot is everywhere.

APP: It’s present on all keyboards pretty much.

EAO: Where it’s the first character of a message followed by lower case words. In that situation, it’s rare.

MIH: ~

EAO: ~ is often a dead key and not on the Italian keyboard.

EAO: &

STA: We could not use a sigil and consider {} or []

EAO: As we are talking about polling on the option that contains a sigil, we need a sigil.

STA: Take it as feedback for the option if it’s hard to find a sigil.

APP: I will use a different option to #

APP: On ampersand, there is &amp;

STA: I found this [NOTA lang](https://nota-lang.org/#def-nota) for structured markup. It uses % and ‘let’ bindings like we do. It was interesting to deduce rules from the snippet . All these rules make sense to us, for people new to MF, they will be random and difficult to deduce.

EAO: If we can’t find a solution here, we can go back to {} or having patterns unquoted.

## Open/close/spannables: where are we?

Let’s discuss the current status and how to proceed with landing this. We will timebox this discussion since it is unlikely we will merge something today.

APP: We had a discussion about open/close being a formal part of the spec (functions in the registry). In Seville we rolled back:
Not allow operands.
Not make open/close placeholders a formal part of the formatter - they would be permitted to format to nothing, if you don't specifically implement them. They would show up as a ‘part’ in format-to-parts.

MIH: We need some kind of registry. Some attributes are localizable, some are not. I don’t know what to translate.

APP: MF doesn't have to have a registry that says “these are supported tags.” People using this would need to do something with it. That would be all on you. STA, you’re proposing some different syntaxes in an attempt to avoid using +/-/#

STA: I have 2 open PRs. One is a serious alternative that EAO and Zibi - like HTML with different brackets. It would require changes to unquoted literals. The other suggestions are for completeness (don’t do anything and delegate this problem to other layers…, or use HTML markup and parse it inside MF, which would be a very heavy requirement for parsing).

MIH: Using HTML-like but with curlies, I mentioned it more than once. Mark Davies had a strong opposition - people used to do {foo} for MF1. I am not against it.

STA: Sorry if I mis-represented.
Going back to the do-nothing approach: it’s cheap to implement. I ran through the list of requirements and, assuming some bespoke support for HTML in CAD[?] tooling, this satisfies a high number of requirements. There are requirements that are completely not supported (e.g. format-to-parts).

APP: We can’t prohibit the do-nothing approach. The purpose of providing syntax in MF is to support doing things with that and particularly, within an HTML, generate the code tokens. I could see people mixing these - typing angle brackets when there's no code going on and making them programmatically active.

EAO: Do-nothing is insufficient. If we don’t have it in MF, I’m going to standardize another format.

MIH: Supporting tooling for HTML - the tool has to know to expect HTML in that message. Imagine HTML inside XML for Android. Tools don’t provide sub-filtering out of the box. You gain protection if you know about the markup.

STA: I think the do-nothing approach is interesting as an exercise. It is possible and always will be. Whatever solution we come up with has to compete with the do-nothing approach. It should inform how we design. If it doesn’t work well, people will choose the do-nothing approach.

APP: I think we can merge this in. Do-nothing is an option we’ve considered.
I thought we were close with the +/- proposal. I know you were unhappy with the number of sigils.

STA: I think discussing 2 would be probably enough.
Am I the only one that sees 9 sigils as a problem? I’d like feedback to know if I should continue beating the drum.

ECH + APP: We should be mindful.

APP: The namespace addition justified the function thing and makes it work cleanly. I think we should be sparing with sigils. I also see slash/no-slash could keep us out of sigils and that would be cool.

EAO: The cost of losing sigils is more positionality-dependent things  - depending where in the code these English words are going to be placed. Even though +/- is not commonly used, it seems to have a relatively low cost of understanding for people. I don’t think the cost is the number of sigils, but the number of new uses (e.g. the colon for function introducer). Not the number, but how we use them and how weird they are.

SC: I largely agree with EAO. It’s about readability.

MIH: Something HTML-like. The price that literals have to be quoted I think is OK.

STA: The standalone one is interesting. In this problem space, we talk about open/close and avoid standalone. HTML syntax has an interesting solution, which is the spannables but at the cost of looking like are regular placeholder. If we go with something more like HTML, we need to rethink placeholders with literals in them.
As for sigils, this is a good discussion. I don't think readability is the entire story. I think most people will understand it anyway - it’s like when a math professor does a proof[?]… It's about recall. If we were to pick sigils, I’d prefer them on open/close rather than match/local/input.

EAO: Slash is an XML approach. HTML doesn’t care. Instead, HTML has an open tag as a standalone tag. We can do the same thing. Even using + as a starter, we can have a registry that we can define with standalone rather than open elements. We don’t need a separate standalone sigil - we can use the open one.

APP: Can we merge STA’s proposals into the design document?
We have a couple of competing designs. Can we get them fleshed out enough that we can make a decision. Is that a good goal for next time?

EAO: We’re choosing between +/- and slash syntax.

APP: The others will be alternatives that we considered in the past. If there’s changes based on this conversation or in the PR, let’s incorporate it in the proposal.

RG: I’d like to object to +/-. Minus has been deemed important for unquoted literals.

APP: That’s fair to list in the cons.

STA: That’s PPR 399, which I keep blocking. It adds a workaround for unquoted literals. I don't like the workaround because we need to have a conversation about the proper design. I would be also OK with doing something explicitly ugly and then going back to the syntax when we get other moving pieces in. The PR already has a lot of value. We can do a temporary syntax now and then do a maybe 2-week sprint where we figure out the sigils for everything.

EAO: You are requesting skipping next spring's release implicitly. I’d rather we try and solve this now we’re down to two choices.

MIH: [Stringify comment]

EAO: Just noting for MIH, I’m not sure what it says in the text about stringifiability. If you do want to stringify, you need to call the format-to-parts output and work through that.

APP: EAO, why don’t you and STA merge what needs merging to produce the candidates for us?

STA: I wanted to push back on choosing between two syntaxes. We’re legitimizing +/- as a candidate. If it’s not slash syntax, I think we should still keep looking. It has the negative number problem. I think there are better syntaxes still.

APP: My fixation on slash was that it was conservative with sigils. It seems like a valid alternative. If there’s a nother one we could consider, design it and propose it. I don’t want to get into the situation where we have ~12 options. We’re looking to converge. We should be having a conversation about the technical reasons (e.g. RG’s comment on minus)

MIH: It might help STA and EAO - I feel strongly about standalone. It improves ‘leveraging’[? - I’ll follow up with MIH to capture this]

[...]

## Format to Parts (#463)

EAO: We need to have a formatter that builds DOM trees and other sorts of data structures.

MIH: This is not enough - we can continue in comments.

EAO: I added a reply to MIH with some JS:
https://gist.github.com/eemeli/e081c442b524878313725943a45dff58
Please look at this when you review.

## Face-to-face meetup

Planned for late Jan / early Feb.
Open to sponsorship for lodging/food/meeting space
EAO unavailable 3-4 Feb so will prefer dates shortly after this.

## Topic: Active PR review

411

APP: Merged

495

APP: We can merge and continue to iterate. Any objections? [None] Merged.

477

STA: Most comments addressed. This could be merged now as it represents a past discussion but EAO has other things to discuss as part of this.

EAO: The reason I asked it to be help was that I added a new alternative - to allow for a pipe char or single/double quote to be used as a quote character. I believe this is a better choice than any others we’ve had so far, as it is good for avoiding escapes and allows for using common characters as quote characters.Happy to land the PR now as ‘proposed’.

APP: Nervous about allowing multiple different quote characters but we can reserve discussion to have as a deeper topic.

STA: I worked on it but have not requested re-reviews. Extra requirement would be good to get a review on too. I did not have time to look at alternatives for this new requirement. The design doc is to document consensus. If we’re unhappy about it, someone can present alternatives (the table is there for a reason) so I’d like everyone to take a look and make sure everyone agrees.

EAO: STA and I can coordinate on this async and present next week,

475

APP: I have it as ‘discuss’ but I have approvals. Is this ready?

STA: So this is a concept in the data model itself?

APP: Yes, and the ABNF.

STA: Question on reviewing these PRs. I see status ‘proposed’ and agree with this status. I don’t know if reviewers agree with the proposal or just agree with there being a doc showing different options.

EAO: Does anyone oppose landing this as ‘accepted’?

STA: This is the consensus, right now?

APP: Yes, and there will be tasks to implement this. [Merged]

471

APP: EAO and I had discussion on doing more work on shorthands. Do you want to do that first?

EAO: Shorthands are a separate dimension. They don’t need to be linked together.

APP: I don’t see any reviews other than mine. Should we merge this and let people have another look?

STA: Maybe we should take an action to read through it.

APP: I’ll hold it.

414

APP: Discussion can be folded into #477.

399

APP: Pertains to our discussion of literals. Let’s not merge it yet.

## Topic: AOB?



