19 June 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference
Attendees:
Please fill “attendee” block with your name, affiliation and a 3-letter acronym for the scribe to use (see examples in “previous attendees”):

### Attendees

- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Chris Dieringer - Walmart (CMD)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Eemeli Aro (EAO)
- Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)

Today’s Scribe: TIM

### Topic: Agenda Review

EAO: Want to overview the long PR to add the rest of the formatting. Premature for discussion, but want to briefly introduce it to help people review the PR https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/396

### Topic: Info Share

Presentation this week (Thursday) by Addison at the Unicode CLDR thingy.

APP: I’m going to make a 10-minute presentation/demo on MessageFormat. You can register/join if interested.

EAO: On Thursday I’m meeting with the PHP frameworks … translation … working group which apparently has been waiting for 1-3 years for us to get something done on MessageFormat, so they can bake it into PHP.

### Topic: Action Item Review

[ ] STA: file issues for the known comments on function registry

### Topic: Introduce the Formatting PR

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/396

EAO: This is an attempt at filling out the missing parts of the Formatting section of the spec. Still a WIP, not really talking about it yet. Very close to the sort of shape I think this section ought to have. I want to highlight that the formatting spec is now split into 3 parts: first, resolution; second; pattern selection; third, formatting. Follows structure I think makes it easier to explain the spec. Doesn’t include bidi. There is a change to the pattern selection intro text to consider separately. This PR is not meant to achieve a “final” state, just to make more progress. Might be useful to identify parts we can land and then iterate, or we could land the whole PR and then iterate on that. Hopefully we can work on this async over the next few weeks. If nothing else, we should follow up at our next call.

APP: We have a glaring problem with FormatToParts in front of us. Thinking about bidi, thinking about a message as a sequence of things that can then be assembled into a string if you want. When you consume them, e.g. in a markup context or something, when you want to get and query the parts. When I looked at the bidi text and then glanced at (PR 396), my reaction is “let’s be sure not to forget about the need for a message to be a sequence of parts or a hierarchy of parts, which can be serialized as a string.”

EAO: I think quite a bit, but probably not all, is covered by the Formatting section that’s added. I invite you/everyone to review it for discussion next time.

### Topic: Active PR review

Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call.
The recommendation "discuss" is to ensure there is WG consensus before merging. The recommendation "merge with edits" is to merge once existing comments have been addressed.

## Topic: Bidi support

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/315
Discussion of bidirectional text support and specifically how to handle auto-isolation of placeables.
APP: I am satisfied with the PR; could make more comments, but I think merging is the right next step. Does anyone want to discuss?
[silence]
APP: Should I merge it? Merging.

## Topic: Name shadowing

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/381

MIH: I see this as controversial; I don’t see how we can merge it. I think it introduces complexity in the spec and implementation and complexity for the user.

APP: I think we tried to address your concerns, Mihai, in various comments on various threads. I tried to demonstrate why, for an author, it seems reasonable to override a variable. We have the problem that you can override an externally defined variable, or else we should decide that it’s illegal, which could be confusing or challenging for users. I think we’re close to consensus and I don’t know that we have other people who are outliers. What would it take to satisfy you?

MIH: To separate the idea of overriding external vs. local variables. Separating them might help improve the “struggle” a little bit. Let’s call these things local variables, the stuff introduced with `let`. That part bothers me most. It’s not that it can’t be explained, but to explain it properly we have to add a lot of verbiage. Explaining that that thing still exists somewhere in the void… this makes the spec more complicated. Implementing it is more complicated. It’s not impossible.

APP: Is the mental model that there’s a map of things? Is that not a useful mental model?

MIH: If you’ve overridden it, it still exists somewhere…

APP: You’ve assigned a value. Later you assign the first value a different thing…
_Didn’t catch all of this_

MIH: I’m trying to clarify overriding what you call “variables defined elsewhere”, which I used to call arguments; redefining the local ones, I don’t see the benefit. It makes the implementation more complicated, it makes the user’s mental model more complicated. If you uniquely rename local variables, it’s instantly obvious what’s happening. I’m arguing that as a developer writing code, I might use this once a week, not all the time; I keep having to re-learn my mental model about this thing, I have to read the whole spec every time to explain that it’s a declarative thing and not… if you give everything a unique name, it’s instantly obvious what’s happening. Why introduce this burden and tell people “go read the spec?”

TIM: [Couldn’t write down my own comment]

STA: I’m on the opposite side. I strongly feel this should be allowed, from the perspective of a native speaker of a Slavic language. To give reasons, Addison’s comments had a list of very good use cases that I think other commenters were asking for. I want to +1. We mentioned complexity and the need to refer back to the spec. I have a sense, this is a double-edged sword. You will also need to check back with the spec if we don’t allow overriding. There are two mental models: why choose the non-intuitive one? Crucially, there is a bit of complexity, true, but I argue that this is very useful complexity in the spec that will be used. There is a big inconsistency with how we handle the message arguments when shadowing them. This is what Addison also mentioned. So maybe we need to solve this first. I don’t see releasing this thing where we can shadow message arguments with local variables, but can’t shadow local variables with each other.

EAO: (from chat) asked -
: Should this be valid MF2, if $num is originally given as an external variable?

```
let $num = {$num :number}
{The number is {$num}}
```

MIH: I don’t mind. I’m not fighting this decision that much. The one that bothers me most is locals

TIM: I think it should be all or nothing (allow shadowing any names, or don’t allow shadowing either external variables or locals)

CMD: I echo what TIm said; I think about humans on the back end of the translation process and if shadowing would wrack their brains. Trying to think of a compelling example - where this would make their translation vulnerable to higher risk. It gives me a bit of an orange flag.

APP: I gave an example where it might be the opposite. We don’t allow nesting of functions, so look at:
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/310#issuecomment-1595055713
That’s a transform where certain languages might want to do multiple things to a term before releasing it to the formatter, and then we localize the patterns that consume it

CMD: I’ll study that

STA: Maybe this is a good time to go back to the vocabulary topic. I know we gave up on that at some point, but maybe the discussion would be easier to have if we were sure we’re using the same terms

MIH: I agree with your use case, sequence of definitions - my solution is to use temporary names. It’s true it messes up the namespace if you want to call it that, the collection of visible names, but it’s instantly obvious what’s happening without reading the spec. I think almost any use case I was shown before can be handled with just new names.

APP: Nothing prohibits you from doing what you suggest, but we’re suggesting allowing the model that you see

MIH: I’m trying to argue that seeing that thing with 3 different names, it’s instantly obvious what it means. I know Eemeli said “obvious” is a personal thing, but I don’t think anyone would be confused by (the unique names).
From chat:

```
let $foo = {$foo :text-transform transform=uppercase}
let $foo = {$foo :trim}
let $foo = {$foo :sanitize target=html}
```

can similarly use different names, and it will not affect leveraging:

```
let $foo_tmp1 = {$foo :text-transform transform=uppercase}
let $foo_tmp2 = {$foo_tmp1 :trim}
let $foo = {$foo_tmp2 :sanitize target=html}
```

I think the second is less confusing. For arguments, I’m ok with not allowing shadowing if that’s less confusing. We could also use different sigils for locals vs. globals. I don’t know if it’s worth the trouble.

APP: A challenge is that the message can’t “see” the argument list. That might be an argument for changing the sigil for local variables, to prevent accidentally overriding a value that’s being passed. I’m not sure we want to reopen that. I promised to timebox; clearly we’re not in agreement yet with my recommendation to merge. I’d like to see if we can work this to “done” by the next call. We need to make a decision and move along. I’m not sure that I’ve heard any new arguments today; we’re still split into two camps. I’d thought we were closer to done. Is that okay?

MIH: Yes. I wonder, what would it take for you to agree with the other position? Temporary names is good enough and it does simplify…

APP: I’d want to change `let` to be `const` or something and might want to reconsider changing the sigil. A concern for me is coming in from the outside with overriding a variable and having that be an error. My message throws an error because someone used the same name internally somewhere? That would be bad to me. I understand your POV but I don’t want to have to explain that to developers.

EAO: I don’t want to fight this thing, it’s not worthwhile, would Mihai and/or Tim be willing to create an alternative proposal?

MIH and TIM: yes

MIH: I’m fine with changing things to `const`. What about having different sigils? This would make it easier to do static analysis. Having the same sigil means there’s a lot of context-dependence to detect errors. Would you be ok with this…

APP: Write a PR

MIH: but in principle, people would be ok with a new sigil?

EAO: This is your thing now, we’ve timeboxed.

STA: The fact that I’m silent does not mean I like the idea of this

APP: It would be work to convince me, but let’s see.

STA: I’ll follow up in Github comments

### Topic: Dangling mention of `nmtoken`

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/387

APP: any objections to merging?

APP: merged

### Topic: Pattern Selection text

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/388

APP: editorial change to [...]

APP: Merged!
The above PR changes the wording related to patterns selection to use a different approach. This is based on a comment Addison made on PR#385.

### Topic: Make pattern selection example 3 clearer

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/389

Editorial changes to make this example easier to understand. (Taken from comments on PR #385)

APP: anyone want to discuss this? Shall I merge? Merged.

### Topic: Explicitly define operand in syntax

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/395
EAO: ok to merge this?

STA: I’d like to use this as the rhs of an option too. I’m not sure what the right word is

STA: I prefer the imperfect “operand” to “value”, so it’s not perfect but I’m ok with it.

APP: any objection to merging?

STA: did you also change the word for the option value?

EAO: No

STA: How about we use `operand` for that too, and if we find a better word, can search and replace later

EAO: Being able to explicitly refer to the operand of an expression has value. If an operand can show up in the rhs of an option, that introduces confusion

[...missed some stuff…]

APP: so we would only use `operand` to mean literals/variables in an operand position… Do we want to define… [missing stuff]

EAO: I think that’s a separate PR

MIH: At first glance, this makes total sense, just renaming terms. The trouble is, in grammar productions, that might make the grammar more complicated. Now you need a lot more context to understand: should I produce an operand or not? I see something and I have to know what I produce from the grammar.

APP: Mark made a comment on this earlier in our history. Sometimes you define a production for something that’s not necessarily structurally but makes it easier to talk about things in the spec coherently.

MIH: If we take the grammar to be kind of like that, where we don’t have to produce exactly the same grammar, it’s fine.

APP: You can always add a level of indirection. Doesn’t change the grammar’s functional interpretation. This is to help people to understand.

MIH: If it’s only for understanding and no one can say “you’re not compliant b/c you don’t produce an operand”, then that’s fine

APP: It’s only conceptual, doesn’t govern what the implementation has to do
EAO: Part of this might be clarified by PR #393 – adding a JSON-based interchange model that’s meant to reflect the syntax on a structural level. More explicit about the sorts of shapes it expects to exist. There is no type called an “operand” but there’s a slot where the value of the operand is assigned.

APP: So what do we want to do with #395? Any objection?

MIH: I’m fine to merge it.

## Topic: Function introducers/negative numbers

See #397 and #398 and various comments about reserved sigils `+` and `-`

EAO: I figured out one way to do this in practice if we’re going to do it, and added it on a branch of the implementation I maintain. Just as a proof of concept; how to exactly express it in the syntax is a different question. It’s possible for us to support negative numbers as unquoted literals without having an impact on everything else. This is because a hyphen and then a digit or a dot are not valid name-start characters, which they would need to be in order for this to parse as a closing markup element. If we want to solve this without changes to markup syntax, we can do it for negative numbers.

APP: With the addition that the parser would have to look ahead by 1?

EAO: Yes, in certain contexts

STA: I think we should solve this problem, and we should strive to make sure that negative literals can be used in any place valid for an operand/option value without quotes. We might be tempted to drop scope, but I think this is important. Eemeli has one way of fixing this with additional lookahead. I opened a PR with an alternative approach. I’m not sure if this is the right time to discuss it

APP: This is what this topic is for

STA: The alternative is to reconsider the open and close prefixes. Today we use +/-. I filed two PRs with two different alternatives. One is more ??, more reasonable, I would call it ?? - the one with colons. The other one is more like “maybe this could fly”. All of this is not ideal. I don’t think we can find prefixes that will feel intuitive. +/- are equally cryptic. I want to acknowledge that as a baseline for us. At least that’s what I claim. I see value in replacing them with something just as cryptic but in the case of :: and :/, it’s something that has some other benefits. The colon option doubles down on : as a generic function introducer. Maybe then we could drop the `reserved` production.

APP: I’m not sure if we have a PR open to reserve some of `reserved` for private use. The two-sigil thing might be a way to do that. But this is reopening the discussion of whether to change +/- or the reserved sigils. I shouldn’t say “reserved”, the non-reserved currently-in-use sigils.

EAO: I would like to contest a little bit the assertion that all of these possibilities are equally cryptic. Many are cryptic, yes; of all the options we’ve considered, I am not aware of anything less cryptic than the +/- pair of things. I’ve shown this can be handled with very little complexity cost to an actual implementation. When looking at something like the Firefox Fluent set of messages we have, this seems like one of the closest things to what we’re actually working towards everyone being able to do with their formatting. Fluent is structurally somewhat similar to MessageFormat and in this space, I can see that things like markup are used by about 5% of all messages while negative literal numbers are not used at all. My strong preference is to do what’s necessary to make markup as good and as non-cryptic as possible, even if the cost is to make the workaround for negative numbers a little bit less complex.

APP: I don’t disagree. I think my concern with negative numbers is that I want the syntax to be intuitive. I think negative numbers and positive numbers should just work as well as each other. … We talked about introducing numbers as a production, e.g. to allow hex numbers. I’m reluctant to, since we don’t have types, and introducing types is a lot. I’m trying to stay off of that, but allowing literals to encompass most of the values that people would parse back into something… dates and times, some other values, it seems like a desirable thing and to make it as easy as possible without the quotes seems valuable to me. If the way to do that is to change the sigil set, that seems like a fair trade-off, if we can find sigils we all agree on. I’ll remind people that we spent a lot of time talking about + and -.

EAO: I added in the chat:
We could have:

```
literal = quoted / unquoted / negative
negative = "-" ( digit  / "." ) …
```

This could be something we see as a negative number, or just an unquoted char… Having a specific thing in the syntax specifically for negative numbers, I think, would not lead people to presume that there is a “number” thing in the syntax that they must parse specifically. Especially if the `negative` rule can contain content that’s clearly not a number.

CMD: in other words, we can avoid disambiguation by just encoding it in the grammar. Two problems: cryptic-ness and ambiguity. There’s contention around the cryptic-ness, but the ambiguity can be solved through the grammar.

EAO: Would anyone object to me adding a PR effectively with what I just proposed. Or does anyone think it’s a bad solution?

STA: You should still add the PR and then this would document if we think it’s a bad solution, and then it would answer the question when people in the future look back. I would like to see the changes to ABNF that Eemeli is proposing. It won’t hurt us to do the lookahead, we already are LL(2). But there’s also an opportunity to do something better than +/-.

APP: It seems like a weird lookahead to me. I’m okay with it

STA: It’s maybe weird because it happens inside a token rather than a complex production composed of terminals.

APP: We could look at different sigil options.

CMD: I’m wondering if there’s a good reference issue that I can go study some of the motivating/originating markup cases. I would like some background so I don’t reopen any past decisions that were heavily debated. To have meaningful input, I feel like I need to be able to see the past, e.g. the origins of markup even being in the spec.

APP: To clarify, we don’t have markup in the spec; what we have are functions and those functions can produce markup if they want to. Some are said to be starters or terminators, opens or closes, but our spec doesn’t say how those are interpreted. They’re not required to be paired or balanced.

MIH: You described functions being open or close; I look at these as being part of the whole placeholder. For example (from chat):

```
{b :html} .=> open
{hr :html} => standalone
```

There’s no real difference between placeholders and markup.

CMD: I’m going to void my comment and go dig in more. The nomenclature is kind of mixed up in the issue tracker and implementations.

APP: it’s a relatively recent set of decisions, so you’ll see some hold-overs esp. In implementation-land, in terms of us trying to build up markup indirectly.

TIM: [suggests Chris could add a document based on old minutes/etc. That explains this history, if it also helps him with his understanding, so the explanation would be in one place; submit a PR]
APP: there’s a docs/ directory in the spec repo; this could go there. If you think something needs clarification, feel free to submit a PR

### Topic: Data model PR

EAO: has anyone had a chance to look at the pending data model PR?

MIH: This is what I wanted to propose for the last topic. I was an early proponent of exposing the data model and I love the idea. I think squeezing it into JSON is going to be controversial and we’re opening a huge can of worms to make this kind of description part of the spec. I gave up on the idea that we could have a data model in the spec, and if we did, I didn’t imagine it could be JSON. I wouldn’t try to put that in the spec.

STA: I looked at the PR briefly. I know we care about the JSON schema, but we also have the function registry in the spec that uses DTDs; either we should go all in on DTDs or all in on JSON schema. I also saw you have a PatternMessage and SelectMessage; on the data model level, make everything a SelectMessage. This could help with tooling. This could be a topic for a larger discussion.

USA: [...I missed some of this…] I’ve been working on documenting some of this. Especially with the function registry, there’s not much documentation/specification of the built-in functions. The number or datetime functions would need to have a similar feature set on all implementations.

APP: That’s an interesting question, and an important thing that we’ve talked about briefly before; are we going to define a standard function registry that implementors are required to implement, and define how they can extend it? We’ve had the discussion before and I’m a proponent of saying we should have a core set of functions; I think it would be a bad thing if there were different ways on different platforms to do the same thing. We have a clear understanding of how a bunch of these selectors should work. It’s fine for me if an implementation wants to extend something in a custom way, but I don’t want to have to change the set of arguments for (e.g.) the number formatters every time I change programming languages, templating languages, etc. This seems like an anti-pattern. I would prefer to have a standard core set. I tend to think we’ll want to make agreements on what the bag of options looks like.

EAO: regarding specifically the data model proposal: I picked JSON Schema because I wanted to pick something that would work as an interchange format for messages so different implementations could rely on this. I don’t think JSON schema is appropriate for defining the function registry. We have several different formats on the table that we’re using for solving different parts of this.

EAO: Mihai, where were you planning on documenting the data model?

MIH: it’s a public class. You can look inside, it can have all the members. I can give you a link.

EAO: That would only be available in the process or program that is using ICU specifically as a formatter. This data model could not be used for working with other tools.

MIH: They are Java interfaces with objects implementing them. The interfaces are designed to follow the ideas we had way back with TypeScript, updated for the grammar as it was when I implemented it.

{Open issue review was deferred]

### Topic: Open Issue Review

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues
Currently we have 85 open.

## Topic: AOB?
