# MessageFormat WG teleconference 2023-07-24

### Attendees
* Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
* Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
* Eemeli Aro (EAO)
* Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
* Ujjwal Sharma (USA)
* Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)

Scribe: USA


To request that the chair add an issue to the agenda, add the label Agenda+ To request that the chair add an agenda item, send email to the message-format-wg group email.

## Topic: Agenda Review

Call for topics
No new community solicited topics

## Topic: Info Share

EAO: Updated the Intl.MessageFormat proposal, will post a link and would appreciate reviews.
https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-messageformat/pull/22

APP: Been performing a cleanup of the repo, don’t be alarmed. Will move the agenda to the wiki since it’s a bit noisy to commit for each update to the agenda.


## Topic: Action Item Review
MIH: propose text and proposed XML for default registry

APP: provide pro/con comparison for immutability/namespacing discussion

APP: Did about half of that in an issue but got sidetracked, should manage to have a productive discussion, let’s see.

## Topic: Active PR review
Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call.
The recommendation "discuss" is to ensure there is WG consensus before merging. The recommendation "merge with edits" is to merge once existing comments have been addressed.
Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call.

* PR #399

EAO: Stas mentioned that we should hold off on this.

STA: Would appreciate it if we could hold off on this for a bit.

* PR #432

EAO: In favor, but want to highlight but we can’t add a selector with a key “<10” later for instance. The cases where expression for the selector outputs a list of keys for the inputs. Just wanted to highlight it so nobody is surprised later.

STA: While this indeed simplifies the signature, it requires the selector to pass all the values in a bag so it disallows the “mini DSL” use case. 

APP: A better way to express it is by making the result ordered by preference since some lists might as well be really big.

EAO: I would suggest you two to check out the PR since we’d need to address the issues with selectors one way or another.

* PR #431

APP: This is ready but we should revisit this later.

MIH: These changes were introduced three days ago, process-wise, should there be a deadline?

* PR #421

EAO: I would prefer you to merge it and make follow-on changes later.

* PR #420

EAO: Happy to see this be merged, we can iterate on it further.

STA: Same, I’d love to starting hacking on this. Note to self, we followed the same approach on the registry stuff but now I have a huge backlog. In these two cases it’s me so I’ll take appropriate action.

MIH: Already done in #422.

STA: Let’s break it up in a few issues.

USA: Agreed, let’s iterate on this once we have it merged.

* PR #419

EAO: In the spirit of what STA mentioned, do we have an issue for aligning around errors and how they’re defined?

APP: I don’t think so, but everything should follow that formatting, so no need for a separate issue.

APP: Will resolve conflicts and merge this.

## Topic: Summary of ad-hoc of 2023-07-21
A small group (@mihnita, @stasm, @eemeli, @macchiati, @aphillips) met on Friday to discuss #425, primarily the problem of "default" selectors. Let's discuss the results of that call.

APP: *introduces the resolution*

EAO: I’d let MIH express himself, but it wasn’t a unanimous decision.

MIH: I thought about it over the weekend. It allows us to have a `match` without a function

APP: It does let you use match without an annotation assuming that you have an assignment with the annotation. We could require the annotation. Is it required in the match statement? We had some discussion about that. The tentative conclusion is to allow it on a separate line. We can allow this through syntax to avoid needing mutability here. I’d like us to reach a decision regarding: is the annotation required?

MIH: I’m thinking of breaking this into several pieces: I’m not happy to allow bare selectors on numbers for instances. If we allow this and rely on declarations, we lose the idea of type implied selectors that I somewhat liked.

APP: Requiring the annotations is counter to the idea of implied selection?

MIH: Exactly.

APP: EAO suggested that a registry function can be both a selector and a formatter. Number works like this and other functions could too. I’d prefer a plural selector but not necessarily that we should disallow functions to be either.

STA: I found an old proposal for separating the syntaxes for both. I’d not go as far but I want to suggest people to use their selectors. The point raised was that we should also be realistic and pragmatic. So if we don’t require an explicit selector, then I’m afraid that since English is a common source language, English can have a rather simple plural selection (equality works) and I’d argue that this is a footgun.

USA: On the plural front …

EAO: On the meta front, one reason why we have so much discussion on this is because we deemed it implementation-specific, but now that we’re doing the function registry, we’re starting to map out more accurately this space where we have diverging opinions. My preference is to try and identify parts of this we agree on and take things from there. Then we could ask about what’s better overall. For now, let’s conclude that we need some annotation and move from there. Do we allow for a number formatter that’s also a selector? That’s a different topic. Of all the examples we need to consider, number is a special one. What are the non-number selectors? On Friday we reached a conclusion for a good first step and I’d love to hear from folks about this.

APP: I have a minor disagreement, but let’s start with agreeing with the higher level outcome. We can have a long and spirited discussion about what’s the most useful name for selector functions for numbers but we don’t need to discuss that to decide if a selector requires an annotation.
…

APP: We should atleast park the name “plural”. We could syntactically differentiate between plurals and selectors.

STA: Unless we disallow it at the syntactic level, there's no way to prevent someone's implementing a function that does both formatting and selecting.

TIM: The annotation should be a part of the selection syntax to simplify things.

APP: When using a plural, you need to know something about how the plural would be used. You might not get a full wall of annotations in the match statement.

TIM: I need to check that example and get back, but two points: if the selector annotation isn’t part of the match construct, then it implies something about how the implementation represents resolved values. If the spec is a bit more specific about the shape of the returned value, it would affect how an implementation does matching.

MIH: For a linter, I would expect any half decent linter to have access to the registry, otherwise it’d do badly. On the other side, I’m not sure if any tools would integrate said linter, even if it’s freely available.

EAO: Right now, the spec imposes no restrictions on selectors in this position. So a completely bare selector on count is a perfectly valid Message. We agreed on strictness is a good idea but we don’t agree on how far to take it. Could we merge the PR on this? Rather than blocking, we could build on top of that.

APP: I agree, the alternative is to have default selectors. That’s what #425 was about. In the spec, we’d need to say what happens without an annotation and we could choose to tighten that behavior later. We’ve talked a lot about linters. I agree with MIH that relying on them is maybe not a good idea. We’d need to teach devs and translators what to do. People don’t want linting, they need a recipe. Who would object to the resolution that we merge the proposal that there must be an annotation, either in the match statement or in the declaration?

EAO: How do we define compatibility with the plural registry? We may come to the conclusion that people use an explicit plural selector rather than doing the number selector by default. With the draft registry, we have options that take any integers as the value. Would some kind of clamping be required in implementations, but we’d allow MessageFormat to allow the entire range of positive integers? Where do we draw the line?

APP: We need testing but also we need to think about the kinds of errors permitted by implementations, or should it fail, should it silently truncate? An implementation might allow a limit to the number input to the selector, whereas on the spec we put no limitations. How the code is set up is none of our business so we should look at the default registry as an expression of a registry the implementation must have.

Registry def: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/registry.dtd

MIH: I think we can disallow a function from being both a formatter and a selector in the DTD. I’m not pushing for that however. We need to allow implementations to have some kind of error recovery and strategy.

USA: …

EAO: In terms of language, a compliant implementation should expose these functions in this shape. We should say that a compliant implementation MUST provide these functions and it MUST provide results for a set of values.

STA: The registry does not expose behavior. It’s only intended to provide extension points. Otherwise, we’re going into the subject of defining clear semantics. What do you mean by it “MUST” work for certain cases?

APP: Let me explain. Number types have a specific size in certain programming languages, you’re exposed to overflow problems. The number formatter takes a number input. You could write a number that’s bigger than the largest native number permitted by that language. Then we can say that if the capability of the implementation is exceeded, it may throw.

USA: …

EAO: To answer about the value of a “MUST” kind of a registry. The value of the registry is a subset of compatible builtins that can be portable across systems. So we can say for certain functions and a limited set of input values, you’re guaranteed results but going beyond any of those limits is purely implementation specific.

STA: There’s no point of interoperability like this unless we define the behavior.

EAO:

STA:

EAO: We should have a 16 bit limit to accommodate them.

APP: We’ve imported typing then, I don’t think that’s our intent. We need a general number formatter.

MIH: I think we should leave it up to the implementations. They could throw an error if they find the input unwieldy.

## Topic: Refactoring spec.md
@aphillips is proposing to refactor spec.md. Let’s discuss whether to pursue this further. See #429

(discussion, decided to proceed)

## Topic: Use quotes instead of pipes for quoting literals (#414)
@eemeli is proposing to change the quote character from | to single/double quotes

EAO: *explains the change*

APP: Nobody loves the pipes but they get the job done and the onus is on Eemeli to prove that we need to reopen this consensus.

STA: In our syntax.md doc, we have a goal that says “easily embeddable in any context”

## Topic: Open Issue Review
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues
Currently we have 83 open (up from 73).
17 resolve-candidate

## Topic: Open/Close function syntax, naming, and immutability.
We have multiple proposals for open/close function markup, including the current scheme (+function/-function). Let's resolve how to support open/close functionality. These proposals partly exist to address the problem of negative literals, given our use of -function currently.
We have also been discussing whether let statements should be immutable. If they are immutable, there is a proposal that they use a different sigil from $ or that they use a two-character sigil (such as $$localVar). Note that separating the sigil allows for static analysis of local variables as called out by #403. This can be a separate concern from whether they are immutable.


## Topic: Discussion of default registry requirements

MIH: propose text and proposed XML for default registry

## Topic: AOB?


#### Link Farm:
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/310#issuecomment-1646670556

https://docs.google.com/document/d/13JVPTuhs_SJXWcsSpjFWNIVk3o-T1DQI30RX0qyeK5k/edit
