# 10 July 2023 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference

### Attendees

- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Chris Dieringer - Walmart (CMD)
- Eemeli Aro (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)

Scribe: CMD, ECH

## Topic: Agenda Review

Call for topics

No new community solicited topics

## Topic: Info Share

Introductions:

CMD: From Customer Experience org. Would like to unify efforts in supporting our international footprint

MRR: From infrastructure and tooling team. We make use of translation. Here to listen and learn.

APP: No new information to share

## Topic: Action Item Review

STA: file known issues against function registry

MIH: propose text and proposed XML for default registry

APP: provide pro/con comparison for immutability/namespacing discussion

(all): Read https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/299

## Topic: Active PR review

_Discussion of active PRs. We will merge or reject them in the call._

> #414

APP: Go read!

> #412

APP: #412 seems like an editorial change. Is there any reason to keep this separate?

STA: It is kept as a separate PR because it would be nice to have one way to describe what we’re calling `operand`. TIM suggested `atom`.

APP: Does anyone agree that we should rename `operand`?

STA: Does anyone else have the concern that we use `operand` to refer to things that are not operands?

APP: One way to look at it is that it is a semantic description. Another way is to just to look at it as a syntactic production.

EAO: I am fine with the name `atom`. I’m not fine with calling it as `operand` since it is not an `operand`.

APP: How about we keep it for now, and think about it for discussions in 2 weeks later.

> #411

APP: Issue #411 is about minor formatting fixes. My preference is to keep private use separate from reserved, even though they behave functionally the same as reserved. I will file a separate issue for that.

STA: “Is this controversial, do you need reviews?

APP: Calls for objections, merge!

> #399

STA: I would like to not merge this because we haven’t fully discussed all the issues that this is trying to solve.

APP: So you would like to discuss open/close and placeholders and other issues together?

STA: Yes. I think we can solve all of the other issues at the same time in an elegant manner. And if we can’t, then we can fall back to this issue to take up that discussion.

> #393

APP: Homework–go read!

STA: Documentation in-flight on sigil review.

## Topic: Format To Parts

APP: (paraphrase) “we gotta do it!”

MIH: (paraphrase) we need mapping into runtime primitives (not strings)

APP: (paraphrase) Acknowledged, read thread https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/41

## Topic: Open Issue Review

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues
Currently we have 73 open.

## Topic: Interchange Data Model

_Let’s discuss @eemeli’s proposal for an interchange data model_

EAO: The purpose is to create an optional data model for the representation of a parsed message.

APP: JSON/XML as examples of the interchange data model

MIH: We already attempted to codify the data model way back when, and we had considered JSON Schema, but we ended up using Typescript for that.

CMD: Something like this is definitely needed. We can focus on the syntax, but we need a target that compilers can use across platforms. Right now, everyone has to run their own compilations and source their own stuff. FormatToParts is another layer of serialization. I do want to see some sort of specification.

STA: I agree with CMD. I like that the PR exists because we would have an optional but canonical

ECH: Observations on conflicting terms, “optional vs canonical”, so what does it mean to have such a thing that is canonical yet optional. Also, we’ve been talking about the data model and trying to codify it for the majority of our time, so where did we lose the thread of this to focus on just the syntax?

APP: Focused on syntax to ensure portability. … Reviving prior discussion. This seemed useful enough that I didn’t want to object to the PR.

TIM: We do have a syntax, but it is non-trivial to parse, thus a format is valuable. “It’s helpful to standardize the intermediate representation”. Doesn’t matter what the format is, but a representation of the abstract syntax.

EAO: JSON issues prior were concerns over non-ordered map, but addressed via array usage. Could add other data representations to demonstrate/support value.

CMD: No one seems to be attached to JSON–if we pursue, whatever best fit structured data format is fine to demonstrate the capability.

STA: Are we debating if JSON is the right transport?

APP: If we normatively declare JSON as the medium, we implicitly declare a JSON dependency.

MIH: This doesn’t help CMD’s desire, if you need that, it’s the MF syntax. I have a problem with a dependency on JSON. I’m happy to discuss this after we finish our deliverable, but this is not our deliverable.

APP: I would like to reiterate what MIH said, which is that it is July, and we were supposed to have our deliverables done by August, even though that has been since pushed out. But we still have a lot of work to do to finish off the syntax and create implementations.

STA: We all agree that we want a description of the data model, but we don’t have an agreement of the representation. So we can have a doc `data_model.md` to describe the data model. We can have a separate doc to have a JSON Schema or XML.

EAO: Would making that change be sufficient?

MIH: No, the problem with JSON / JSON Schema / XML that we experienced previously was that they were not powerful enough to represent all of the concepts that we needed. For example, we want to indicate that a map is ordered, but that is not something

## Topic: Open/Close function syntax, naming, and immutability.

EAO: One of the reason that we ended up with `name` and `nmtoken` is that we ended up with `.` and `:` as path separators. This is a blocker for using the Unicode spec UTS 31 for identifiers. Is there any objection to allow `.` or `:` in places where we allow it?

STA: I don’t have an answer for EAO’s question. Last time, we had a disagreement about how to unblock definition of local variables and mutability of the variables. But we don’t have enough time to resolve that topic today. Something that we could discuss is whether the open/close syntax should be represented as placeholders or as functions.

APP: We chose `nmtoken` naming for a variety of reasons, including compatibility with CLDR. The rule is fairly permissive, but we violated the allowance for certain sigils. No matter what sigil you choose, you will be in violation of some language or templating system’s syntax.

EAO: We should have a path separator allowed in the spec.

STA: On the topic of path separator, we agreed last year to have the path separator be a convention. If we want to free up `:` as a path separator. On the topic of `nmtoken`, if we can resolve that, then it would be good. It would be unfortunate to miss the opportunity if we were one character away from being compatible with `nmtoken`, even though that’s not a hard requirement.

APP: +1 to STA on compatibility with `nmtoken`.

EAO: I don’t want to reconsider `:` as a function introducer. We have been happy with it so far.

MIH: I am okay to do whatever we need to do, even if it doesn’t match `nmtoken`, which many developers might not know anyways.

APP: If we decide our own production rules, do we decide a list of code points?

MIH: +1

STA: -1. Why does the world need another identifier definition?

APP: We already did that when we deviated from `nmtoken`.

EAO: I like the `:`, `+`, `-`. Those are sigils that have some meaning to people not yet familiar with MF 2.0.

MIH: To STA’s question about whether `+` and `-` are descriptions of the function or the placeholder, I see them as descriptions of the placeholder. The placeholder types are `OPEN` and `CLOSE` (where `STANDALONE` might be another such type). Whereas, it would be strange to consider them

## Topic: AOB?

Next steps

APP: As an input to the discussion for the next time, here is the [discussion from the W3C i18n WG](https://www.w3.org/2023/07/06-i18n-minutes.html#t07) regarding shadowing / im-/mutability of local variable definitions. Initially, they had one interpretation, but as they looked at it more, they changed their mind.
