[Automatic Transcription Part I](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hX_1by6tx9UwNaOu1-xbQtSDhTotluod4UhXgH5mxnc/edit?usp=sharing)
[Automatic Transcription Part II](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o3SDgGZLohFlcFgcIgcgzDYcr5TioV5haayUdBsWsc0/edit?usp=sharing)

#### April 19, Meeting Attendees:

- Romulo Cintra - CaixaBank (RCA)
- Daniel Minor - Mozilla (DLM)
- Jean Aurambault - Pinterest (JAU)
- Nicolas Bouvrette - Expedia (NIC)
- Eemeli Aro - OpenJSF (EAO)
- Mihai Nita (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Luke Swartz - Google (LHS)
- Standa Rygal - Expedia (STR)
- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- David Filip - Huawei, OASIS XLIFF TC (DAF)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

May 3, 11am PST (6pm GMT) - Extended
May 17, 11am PST (6pm GMT)

## Agenda

- [ Agenda on Github ](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/148)

### Moderator : Romulo Cintra

### Review summary documentation of the existing proposals

ECH:

ZBI: I think there are 2 planes that we are talking about. Simplicity vs. Completeness is one plane (dimension) that we are thinking about. Another is Realistic / Pragmatic (fitting into current ecosystem) vs. Aspirational. That is another dimension that we can talk about, and I think it will make it much easier for us to decide.

MIH: I think the language and how we name things is important. Aspirational is one way of looking at it, but I think the other proposal is so complex that I would call it one that leans towards complexity.

RCA: I would like both documents to have very similar structure. It would help people who read both sides to understand them better. There might be differing points of view, but it would help in understanding the paradigms.

I would like to have Pull Requests on the repo once these documents are ready.

EAO: I'm not sure how we're meant to proceed here with these documents. When should we talk about them? Do you want to present them now?

RCA: Who has already read these documents? Should we postpone discussion of these documents or talk about them now? I see more votes to postpone discussion on these documents than to present them now.

### #159 - Q1, Q2 from extended meeting

RCA: [Here are the notes](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/master/meetings/2021/notes-2021-03-29-extended.md) from the extended meeting regarding issue 159. We took an informal vote to take the temperature of the room on a couple of questions that seemed central to the discussion. Who wants to summarize the 2 questions?

EAO: My understanding is that Q1 was never asked, and Q2 is a reformulation of Q1.

RCA: Okay, we talked about summarizing these questions for today's meeting, no?

EAO: I'm happy to summarize the questions for the proposal that I am in favor of.

We decided to proceed in designing the data model in layers. How do we design the data model so that the layers don't have to be an exact match to each other, in such a way that the design doesn't have to be a huge monolith?

MIH: I don't think anyone argues against a modular development or in favor a monolithic approach. As a proponent of the other data model, I think the main difference is not about how to map to XLIFF or to localization. The major difference, I think, is that one of the models is trying to be very flexible so that it can accommodate anything in the unforeseeable future. And the other model is about "let's start with something simple" and add to it as necessary. Neither model claims to be a final draft, and both will take features and requirements, like from Github Issues, and iterate based on that.

Thinking about mapping to XLIFF is pushing us in a direction that is not so relevant. We already have mapping to XLIFF as a goal. XLIFF already has a way to extend things. I would argue that some coupling is required, but it is not as tight as it sounds. Our data model might have extension models that need XLIFF extensions, but XLIFF is designed for translators, so it won't be the same, but it will be similar because of the overlap in goals.

RCA: I think we are at a point where we can start to make the data models fit the requirements. We have spent a year or two, and we have a lot of points of discussion, but also lots of points of convergence between the 2 models. So how

EAO: Clarifying question: you previously mentioned that the data model and the XLIFF interface should be designed together, now are you saying that they shouldn't be designed together?

MIH: Yes, I think they should be designed together because if you don't design with XLIFF in mind upfront, then it will be harder to make

EAO: Are you proposing that we design all of the layers of the data model now, or do we design the XLIFF mapping separate from the data model?

RCA: My question is whether we design the 2 different data model proposals in parallel, or do we test the data models against features and end up with one data model?

MIH: I think those are 2 different questions.

EAO:

ZBI:

MIH: I think the way forward is that we start implementing things in the 2 data models. It might mean a little bit of parallel work, even though I wanted to get to a single data model at this point. But I think doing implementation work will help us get to positions that are closer.

EAO: Another way to proceed is to go back to the consensuses that we previously achieved, and see how well the current data models fit those stated consensuses.

Another related possibility is **\_\_**

RCA: Do we have one data model, or both? Let us check whether both data models fulfill the consensuses that we have achieved.

The second point is try to prioritize the features each data model data model should respect.

EAO: And have a deadline of the next extended meeting on the data model, which is in 2 weeks?

RCA: Yes.

MIH: The point is to identify the features, not to implement them, per se.

RCA: I believe so, since we don't have a consensus on a single data model.

MIH: Maybe it's too early, but let's say we agree on 7 features that we think the data models should implement. Then what? The problem is that people who want a model that is designed to handle features that we haven't seen yet, then will those 7 features be enough?

RCA: We have to include opinions from everyone, including people who haven't been coming to the meetings, even if it takes longer, so that we have a clear vision. This is just my personal opinion.

EAO: I think we should list some features right now so that we include in the reporting and work. Like dynamic references and \_\_\_.

MIH: I'll implement dynamic references because I told EAO that I would, but I don't see any specific linguistic feature requests on Github that require dynamic references. But I think what we should be doing is taking actual needs and

NIC: I think some of the currency formatting examples would be a good starting point.

EAO: Isn't the point to identify the requirements now?

MIH: The important aspect is that we should be implementing linguistic features.

GRH: From my experience, there are quite a few dynamic features. If I want to say "The object is on" in French, I can change the entire sentence based on what the object is. The definite article and other stuff depends on masculine / feminine, etc. In Spanish, the article depends on gender and plural, and even the word "and" varies. There is a lot going on that you can't hardcode.

MIH: I totally agree that there are tons of dynamic things, but these are not related to dynamic references. This is why I think we should take linguistic examples and start from there.

GRH: If I want to say "to the building", "to the car", "from the building", then depending on the preposition, I have to change the message morphologically.

DLM: I support prototyping abstract features, and identifying features is a good way to find limitations on what is possible in the models. Then we can go back and decide if those limitations are actually linguistically relevant. If we start with what's considered linguistically relevant all the time, it will not give us a distinction between the 2 models, and that will make it different to choose between the two models later on.

Standa: The way we got to dynamic references is when we have different selection patterns built into a messages. With the assumption that going forward that we would only use top-level selectors, then dynamic references would be the only way to support them, is that right?

EAO: No, that is a different issue. Both models support dynamic references.

MIH: What we agreed we need for multiple selectors is message references. Dynamic ones would be that the message has a variable reference that contains a message reference. Another level of indirection.

EAO: Using the cat example from earlier, \_\_\_\_.

STR: In that case, it is difficult for me to imagine a scenario where that is required in a practical application. So that leads me to Mihai's position, where we should have a linguistic scenario where that feature is actually needed.

EAO: Let us say that you need to say something about the browser, in a language that modifies the words in different cases. You could have "Safari" and all the ways you pronounce it in different cases, and same for "Firefox".

STR: That sounds like a pretty legitimate use case, and a feature worth supporting in my point of view.

MIH: I totally agree with framing things as linguistic features. If that forces both models to implement dynamic message references, that's great. It's not clear to me that this is the case. But I will implement it because I owe it to EAO since I promised him that I would.

RCA: In order to standardize the selection of these features, should we describe what we want? Or do we just add to a list, and then decide together?

MIH: I would like it if people provide as ugly of a feature as possible, in other words, things that are tricky to implement but based on linguistic use cases.

RCA: Can we take this feature as one of the list?

MIH: Sure, but I would like to have a list that is clear.

RCA: Yes, I just created issue [#165](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/165) in order to do exactly like that. I know that we have collected features previously in other places, but let us use this new issue for our purposes now.

STA: Not all features are going to be linguistic. Some of the features that we will likely want for the standard will not be linguistic per se, but will be making expressing certain ideas easier in the format. So I'm not sure if we're just listing issues that are related

Also, I feel like dynamic references are used as a proxy for a larger abstract issue, but there hasn't been anything else that is nearly as contentious as dynamic references, so maybe we should just talk about dynamic references.

MIH: Right, we shouldn't **\_**

STA: Right, and better linting is a feature that isn't a linguistic feature, but is something that we might want.

MIH: So yes, saying "linguistic" features was too narrow.

EAO: **\_**. So really, I guess we're asking for user stories.

RCA: What do you think about collecting features before the next extended meeting in 2 weeks?

EAO: Let's have features submitted in 1 week. I will guarantee that for any issues are sent within 1 week, then I will be able to review them and be able to respond to them before the meeting.

RCA:

MIH:

EAO: We are treating Github issues as user stories, but **\_**

RCA:

### Roadmap of Message Format 2.0 for 2021

RCA: I don't think we are in a good position to speak about the roadmap. But we have made bullet points in the chair group meeting that you can view. [These are the Feb 2021 chair group meeting notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zkWoBAWaMaidHqEk75Psrq8mqWBwp-fyOHAXW_nMOYM/edit?usp=sharing) that contain a sketch of a roadmap. Let me know if you have any additions on that.

The first thing we spoke about is to unify the data model, which we are discussing right now. The next point is testing XLIFF uses cases against the data model - can DAF or MIH clarify what this bullet point is about?

MIH: I'm not sure what the question is, since we have it as a goal to have XLIFF mapping.

RCA: Also, we spoke about having a testing platform - we talked about having test cases, and GRH has provided some of them. Also, having implementations running tests would be very useful so that we can have use cases validated as being supported.

Also, reference implementations, JS is one example.

MIH: I also want to have a statically typed language so that the rigidity that you don't have in a dynamic language can be tested for ability to support implementations.

RCA: Also, advocacy is another area of work. We want to get more people involved as stakeholders, present at conferences and webinars.

EAO: Where are the tests?

RCA: You can find GRH's test data in [this pull request](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/113/files).

EAO: It would be nicer as JSON, but XML is okay.

MIH: Yes, let's merge, and it's not hard to fix or remove later if we change our mind later.

RCA: Great, it is merged, so https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/tree/master/test can now be our source of truth for tests. I also know that EAO and MIH have tests in their own implementations.

MIH: In theory they can, the trouble is that you end up having a lot of extra work to convert the test data form some format into something more suitable for the implementation.

EAO: I also have a lot of JSOn data used for testing MF v1.
