# 21 January 2025 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

*Attendees:*  
Please fill “attendee” block with your name, affiliation and a ***3-letter*** acronym for the scribe to use (see examples in “previous attendees”):

## Attendees

- Addison Phillips \- Unicode (APP) \- chair  
- Mihai Niță \- Google (MIH)  
- Eemeli Aro \- Mozilla (EAO)  
- Matt Radbourne \- Bloomberg (MRR)  
- Richard Gibson \- OpenJSF (RGN)  
- Shane Carr \- Google (SFC)  
- Mark Davis \- Google (MED)


  
**Scribe:** MRR

##  Topic: Info Share

EAO: I’m starting to use MF2 and will continue to report interesting things that pop up. This work is going to be in Python and JavaScript \- it’s mostly for the Pontoon system that we use for translation at Mozilla. I’m refactoring so it retains MF2-style data. It’s going to need tools in the back-end and front-end. I need some way of transferring data between these, and storing messages in the database, and this has to be performant, and the native representation isn’t MF2, I’m going to represent messages in a parsed structure that is a terser version of the data model we have. We include things that aren’t necessary for a parser/serializer. E.g. In the internal model, making declarations a mapping, rather than a list and losing the differences between input and local… just observations so far.

APP: I will be absent next week, so if I can get a chair please. After that, I will be available.

##  Topic: Data Model JSON Schema

*Eemeli noticed some issues with it. PR\#982 attempts to correct. Agenda+*

##  Topic: PR Review

*Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.*

| PR | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| \#982 | Fix data model JSON Schema | Discuss, Marge |
| \#923 | Test schema: allow src property to either be string or array of strings | Discuss |
| \#983 | Drop reference to a “function registry” | Discuss |
| \#984 | Make normalization advice in :string normative | Discuss |

\#923:  
EAO: Discussed last week. Some discussion ought to happen in the PR. Let’s not repeat the discussion now.

\#982:  
APP: This has two approvals. One from me and one from MRR.  
EAO: As a sidenote, if anyone has a use for the DTD version of the data model. It’s possible that there are bugs there. Or is there a scenario where we’d drop that because it doesn’t have utility?  
APP: I’d be concerned if we’re providing something that isn’t being maintained.  
\[Merged\]  
APP: I’ll create an issue to track the DTD and we’ll come back to that.

\#983  
APP: The one change that caught my eye \- when I wrote the former introduction, I used the names ‘required’ and ‘recommended’ for the types of options. When you did this PR, you removed the separation of these terms. We could also use different naming. We need to sort out the terminology in a somewhat permanent way. Removing the bolding doesn’t bother me but using different terminology would be a big\[?\] change.

EAO: We include language about, even if you don’t have an implementation of the recommended stuff, you should take note and not fail completely. It let me to think that it’s not useful to think of the default functions as 2 sets, rather one set where some are required and some are recommended. This would align a bit more closely with practices that we have otherwise for naming things. Uppercase boldified names felt a bit different to what we’ve done elsewhere in the spec.

APP: I think one could ask questions around whether ‘default’ is the right word. It’s “this is the minimum set that’s required to support”. Some of the options are “recommended” \- I agree that there’s one set of these. Presumably other functionality would come into this set, or we’d maintain a set nearby of optional functionality, which we don’t require for the minimum. We don’t want to incumber minimum-capability implementations with things that require a lot more resource. I agree with you in the other ways (e.g. what I did in 46-1). I’d like to merge this in fairly soon.

\#984  
APP: It’s advice to message authors. Any thoughts?  
\[Thumbs up from MIH, MRR\]  
\[Merged\]

##  Topic: Issue review

[https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues)

Currently we have 35 open (was 31 last time).

* 1 is tagged for 46.1 (Action-Item)  
* 20 are tagged for 47  
* 3 are tagged “Seek-Feedback-in-Preview”  
* 6 are tagged “Future”  
* 14 are `Preview-Feedback`  
* 2 are `resolve-candidate` and proposed for close.  
* 2 are `Agenda+` and proposed for discussion.  
* 0 are ballots

| Issue | Description | Recommendation |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| [935](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/935) | Well-formed vs. valid | Discuss |
| [724](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/724) | Message Format Unquoted Literals | Discuss |


### \#935

APP: This started life as the difference between well-formed and valid for certain message values. We addressed this in the function descriptions in a number of places. Those, in some places, define what the acceptable value is, not necessarily for closing some of these issues.

MED: The notion of well-formed vs valid is something used in a lot of identifiers and systems. It allows us to give better error messages and preflight things and say ‘this isn’t even well-formed, I don’t need to look in this table and see if it’s valid’. It would be useful to tell if we’re consistent about that for the identifiers and values that we use. A lot of option values are enums. They’re not arbitrary strings. It would be really helpful if we could say the options are well-formed. It also goes for cases like “a currency needs to have this format”.

APP: I am unsure which changes we should make \- there are several sets of things. There are several enums.

MED: Well-formed is a constraint on what happens in future too.

APP: You could put a well-formedness constraint but most of the time within a closed set, you’re going to go “it’s one of these”. For currency codes, we don’t list them all \- they change over time, so well-formed is super interesting. You can check for three letters… Timezone identifiers are another example. Syntax is easier to describe \[than the fixed set of values\].

MED: The specific changes are \- if we said that we define an enum as “an option is an enum when it’s well-formed values are restricted to \*blah\*, so compact display is an enum. That means it’s easy to say. For untyped languages, it doesn’t make a difference.

EAO: The problem here possibly is that we have the message syntax-level wellformed-vs-valid criteria but , we’ve gone on from there and been defining what are the appropriate options and option values. We’ve collapsed the space \- maybe this is the source of the conflict here. Possible solution would be to explicitly define well-formed and valid criteria for all of the options that we define.

MED: We define that an enum once. Then in all the things that are enums, instead of restating the criteria each time. For well-formed ones, we say what the criteria are or defer that (defined by another spec).

EAO: That would be ‘yes’ and somewhat like what we’ve done with the digit size option in the spec. This doesn’t answer all the criteria though. E.g. the argument of datetime. What we’ve ended up doing is a regex expression for what should work (provided you don’t do something silly like 31st Feb) and we allow implementations to go beyond that. The regex is structured as the common subset of what practically speaking is supported by datetime formats. We are not forbidding an implementation from supporting values beyond that set.

APP: Looking over the things we have \- currency code, currency, … date and time have a few open sets, calendar numbering system, timezone. Most of the things are enums. We could define enum well-formedness. That would be straightforward. We could say “here are the valid values” and have one place that says what an enum is.

MED: I could draft a PR for that, and people can comment on that.

EAO: This doesn’t answer timezone \- it’s the same thing as the datetime argument. We could agree on some values that “everyone” should support but implementations could go beyond.

APP: I think that’s a special case and we’d provide the right normative language on the allowed values. We’d strongly encourage support for the common IANA timezone identifiers. There are people that have their own identifier systems.

MED: Why don’t we pick this back up after I’ve done the PR and look at the naughtier cases.

APP: We don’t need to impose the exact same restriction as enum.

SFC: \[In chat\] (I am in favor of the principle of being more strict to improve interoperability)

### \#724

MED: It’s a hack to say we’re going to do names and numbers but not other things. The minimal requirements we have for quoting is preventing ambiguous cases. I think it would be sufficient to say for 47 is that we have a line “the format for unquoted literals will be expanded in a future version”. Given the syntax and we’re locking it down, we could be more lenient (e.g. permit various things that don’t collide with syntax) on the characters that can appear in literals.

EAO: I don’t believe we have an intent to change this for 47 and we don’t promise forward-compatibility. We mandate that formatting at runtime can’t make a difference between a quoted and unquoted literal. I don’t think we need even a note about it because of the promise of no forward compatibility. Because of the restrictions we already impose, this isn’t going to be a big imposition on any implementations.

APP: I’m gonig to slightly disagree \- anywhere you can have a literal, you can have a quoted literal that can contain any string, but the quoted ones can’t conflict with the syntax. When we took away forward compatibility, we took away colon (:).

MED: Actually not because right now you have to have whitespace separating. Anything that starts with a colon currently.

EAO: I’d ask us to reserve some starting characters.

APP: We took that out but there’s still the ghost of ASCII punctuation to be reserved. I’d say ‘yes \- let’s expand this’ but we’d have to go through it. Name is pretty permissive but you’re right that there are characters that are left out.

MED: I’m happy if we delay this until after 47, but I think this warrants a note because people might think the syntax is set in stone and I want to make it clear to readers.

APP: There’s no harm to quoting literals. What you’d be providing is the ability to unquote some of those literals.

MED: Let’s suppose we didn’t have quoted literals for numbers with periods in them.

EAO: I’d find it simpler to do the work now and just make the change.

APP: We should carefully work it. We want the syntax to be durable. I don’t think this is going to change very much.

EAO: Who’s going to do work on it?

APP: MED or myself?

EAO: Making the rule for unquoted being “it doesn’t mess with the syntax” would make it much clearer to the reader or user.

APP: I agree with you but we made a little bit of affordance with implementers.

### \#956

EAO: I like this idea. If you do plural selection, you’re probably going to end up selecting on the wrong thing because there’s a multiplier of 100 involved.

APP: There’s something to be said for splitting it off because we split currency off.

MIH: Sounds good to me.

SFC: Plurals are interesting. With percent, there are two perfectly valid mental models \- let’s not bikeshed about the correct one. The one used by ICU and ECMA402… The implied result is that ‘style’ will be an empty option and we can just remove it. Are we all in agreement?

\[Agreement\]

SFC: Normative vs optional is really hard for me to track. I’ve been misled a couple of times and I’ve let APP know. If we had, in addition, a single centralized list, a table of contents.

APP: It’s hard to comment because it’s a specification. We use normative language in a normative way. If we have specific errors in the spec, we want to know about them. There aren’t a large number of truly optional things. There are things that are ‘should’ed, which can be left out. We make it clear what those are.

SFC: In one of the issues, you listed out how many instances of the word ‘should’ there were (e.g. 20).

APP: Lowercase ‘should’ is used for examples and is not normative.

SFC: “implementations SHOULD” \_is\_ optional.

EAO: What I’m hearing the ‘ask’ is: For the places in the spec that do not require, but allow or recommend, SFC is asking for these to be given identifiers for each individual case?

SFC: Yes, that’s the evolved version of the original ask. Another example is “usage \[RECOMMENDED\]”.

APP: ‘RECOMMENDED’ is well defined.

SFC: Is it the entire bullet point that’s recommended?

APP: The linkifier wasn’t run against our spec.

APP: The place that you need to start is…

EAO: …the functions README is where you’ll find that.

SFC: If I open number and go to currency, it doesn’t say, does that mean it’s required by default?

APP: Yes, and we can improve that.

SFC: I stand by what I said earlier \- I think it’s useful to create a central registry for features. It’s for interoperability.

MIH: If you look at the TOC in the functions README.  What do you think if we put the keyword right need to the function here? (e.g. :number (required))? Would that help?

SFC: It would help with comprehensibility. It wouldn't address my other issue, which is about interoperability.

EAO: One thing we ended up not doing is assigning codes for errors. It’s the same sort of space for interoperability, having consistent behavior identifiers that work across implementations that aren’t on the happy path. I don’t oppose creating identifiers for the RECOMMENDED or optional features. If we do that’ we probably ought to implement error codes as well. When writing a python parser, I did have to go back and use different names for the errors because they felt more appropriate in the implementation. E.g. we used to have ‘annotations’ but we now have function things. Coming back to what SFC was saying, I feel ambivalent about the utility of having an index of optional/recommended, but in the validator discussion earlier today, saying ‘this message requires this version to work’, we could \[reference the feature in the index\].

APP: If there are problems with normativity, we should fix that. We could number that set of things, because the state of the spec is what it is. If you read the spec from cradle-to-grave it says what it is.

MIH: One of the things that we tried in the beginning and postponed is collision of functions in the (...I’m not going to call it…) registry. It should be easy to diff the machine readable registry to mitigate things a bit \- you’ll know exactly what you can and cannot use.

SFC: I think the main thing to think about now is. We can improve the language after 47, the registry thing too. If there’s anything syntax-wise, we should discuss that now. I had a vague idea that you could comment them using an ‘o:’ prefix. I’m comfortable that, if we say this is a thing we can do that doesn’t block the spec, we should just be clear on what blocks and what does not.

APP: If some of this is not usable enough, let’s fix that. We’re engaged in a series of PRs around that. I saw MED’s comment and thought ‘no’ because of the cognitive load on users to remember which of these items is optional and not. There’s probably a need for a description of functions that are not in the default set so they can be implemented consistently across the default set. That might be truly optional and does not belong in the default set but harmonizes.

MIH: If I use ICU4C/J, I still don’t know what is optional/supported. I can diff the machine-readable format. I know it’s the safe thing.

SFC: My other comment is that the other reason we may want to have identifiers in the conformance tests \- e.g. “this is testing this optional features”. It means people can ignore the tests for optional features. That’s another use-case.

APP: The tests should certainly reflect the requirement level. I don’t know if that rises to a requirement for the identifier being in the name.

SFC: I should be able to turn on some of the optional tests (but not others) programmatically.

EAO: Tests make the case for things that are not in the syntax being used as an identifier.

SFC: My conclusion for 47 \- this is something that we’ll probably need for testing. It’s not really a spec-blocking thing. For \#977, I will continue to file bugs for things that need to be addressed.

## ** Topic: AOB?**

### Identifier

EAO: Related to the default function naming ewtc.: I think it would be really useful to have a URL-ish identifier for the schema (or set of functions) to the spec version, so we’d have a common identifier. For example, “the MF2.0 with functions in LDML 46.1”. They wouldn't need to have references for where they’re pointing at, just a solid identifier.

APP: I kind of agree \- we used to have an identifier for machine readable descriptions, which we throw overboard to reach 45 or 46\. I think there’s validity in having a descriptor. Maybe we can revisit that in the 48-timeframe. That might be DTD-style that says what my capabilities are and a machine-readable description that a tool could use.

EAO: I’d find it useful sooner to have the identifier available. We’re getting to implementations like ICU that might have a way to say “here’s an ID for the core set and here’s an ID for the things on top of that that’s supported for ICU.” It becomes difficult for any tooling to start existing without these identifiers. I don’t think we need the machine-readable one to exist \[yet?\]

APP: There's a thing called W3C and IETF specref, which is the canonical list of versions… used a lot on W3C. [https://specref.org](https://specref.org). What you want is a useable identifier that’s durable and clear.

EAO: …and would differentiate 46.1 from 47, even though they’re both nominally 2.0. That’s what we’re using for versioning the functions.

APP: I think we’d probably want to version the functions separately. I don’t think we’d want to change the spec much once we’re done.

EAO: To avoid making up a new versioning system, referring to the LDML version might be enough.

### TAG review

EAO: Is it getting too late for us to ask for a TAG review?

APP: I’ll file that when we get off this call. I also have an action to do this for the ICU-TC so they may have a few questions.

EAO: I’ve been asking TC39 TG2 to input.

### Currency symbol

EAO: In the last TG2 call, because I introduced a proposal for the currency formal symbol, effectively there’s an issue because we might want to iterate on the name. Also, there’s an issue in the data. In CLDR, it’s only defined for the taiwanese dollar in traditional Chinese. Given that, my presumption is that nobody uses it, could we remove it from the required or even recommended set? For most currencies and locales you have a symbol and narrow symbol. It’s in our spec and not useful at the moment.

APP: There’s some weirdness in CLDR because of the variant symbol. I have bugs open for CLDR because they don’t define the pattern. It’s not the symbol and it’s not the narrow symbol.

EAO: If i were to file a PR for our spec, would that passthrough OK?

APP: I would really like to see this currency symbol screwing in CLDR fixed because it’s distracting.

EAO: It’s part of the core reason why I’d leave it out for now.

APP: OK \- put a PR in. I will publish the bug ID in CLDR. If you all can take a look at it and maybe add to it.

EAO: Before you file that, I’ll file the PR and refer to the TC39 proposal around what the formal symbol could be like. SFC has also filed an issue around this in CLDR.

SFC: There’s a format we had at Google that we could consider upstreaming. It wouldn’t be hard to add to CLDR \- it could be another currency style. I agree on removing it for now because it’s not specced out.

APP: I’d double down on our action \- removing is fine. I do want to see this fixed \- it suggests to me that there will be more changes coming.

MIH: I’d recommend not to use the Google format \- it has flaws. In the meantime, I looked at the formal thing. It’s an ‘alt’. I don’t think there’s a way to access it.
