### June 27th, meeting Attendees

- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- David Filip - XLIFF TC, Huawei (DAF)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

### Agenda

Review PR’s & Open Issues
Delimiters ([] vs. {} vs. none) Issue #255
Review tech preview blocker issues
Try to find a temporary solution for markup elements
Plan next steps before tech preview(Jul & Aug)

## Review open issues

ECH : This meeting would be the “final” meeting where all decisions made would be included in technical preview - you all agree with this? We of course all acknowledge that the technical preview is not necessarily what the final spec will look like, as we have reiterated in almost every meeting recently.

STA: I’m ok with that and July being quiet give us opportunity to work on implementation and tests. We should leave today’s meeting with a plan.

## Review PR's & Open Issues

#240

EAO: We originally labeled this as a blocker because we thought we could include this for the tech preview, but I think we were wrong on that estimation.

STA: I think this was a point of disagreement between EAO and MIH during the last meeting.

MIH: I think the title is not really descriptive of what we're trying to solve at this point.

EAO: I would describe the situation as that we have different views about how the idea of markup elements ought to work, so that needs further resolution. But we will not reach an agreement here. One possibility is that start and end elements will end up getting passed through in the tech preview implementation. Is that the suggestion?

MIH: Yes, that is the idea.

RCA: Does this mean that at this moment, we have an intermediate solution that we can put in the tech preview?

MIH: No, we don't have an agreement. So I wouldn't want to put it into the tech preview and then have a big change.

STA: I think we can edit the title of this issue. It's not only about standalone element, but more generally about all markup elements (open and close, too). What MIH is saying that markup elements should be represented as a literal value argument to a function that represents the type of markup. I don't know if we will have an agreement today.

MIH: My suggestion is for the literal syntax like this

```
For me:
{+b :html}
b = positional argument
:html = function
```

But Mark's

EAO: I think the black box is the better way to go right now because it doesn't make a decision on how to handle markup elements and leaves for room for them to be decided later.

STA: And to clarify, does the black box implementation mean that when the parser sees the + or - sign, then it returns the entire text of that placeholder in the formatted output as-is without any interpretation.

MIH: Yes. My contention is that we will find that markup elements are basically the same as placeholders.

RCA: So we are all in agreement that we will have the black box pass-through behavior for now for markup elements.

#241

EAO: I think we can defer the issue by allowing this to be passed through in the black box manner, too.

#248

ECH: This really needs to get figured out. It's an issue hampering the discussions in this group. It doesn't have to be a "blocker" in the sense that it blocks the tech preview implementation, but we really need to come to an agreement

#256

EAO: We have a consensus on this by now.

MIH: Don't close this until we merge the PR that addresses this.

#260

STA: I don't think that any syntax addresses this right now. I think we will eventually address this.

EAO: Are we making the registry public for initial implementations?

MIH: No, not now.

EAO: So since this is an implementation detail for MIH's and my tech preview prototype code, we don't need to decide on this right now.

#275

EAO: This is covered by the PR, too.

RCA: Okay, let's move to the PRs now.

#285

MIH: Let's start with #285 because that should be uncontroversial. It's just updating the syntax docs markdown based on what we agreed to last week. It should be a formality.

#287

EAO: Originally, this PR came from a discussion between me and STA to implement a few different things that we had agreed upon. We came up with something in line with what we have done before that could work. I think it was me who said that we can't expect any translator to look at this syntax and make sense of the message enough to know where the translatable parts are.

Then MIH, STA, and I discussed the ideas, and we discussed the idea of using keywords like `case`, `when`, etc., and I wrote the issue and PR to document the ending state of those discussions.

STA: To add, we agreed the primary audience for the syntax is developers, and that parsers would need to start in "code mode" when beginning the parsing of a message string.

EAO: One approach is to see if this PR will make things significantly worse, and if not, we can merge, and then collect opinions and data from users.

STA: I would like to get visibility on whether we agree or not about whether keywords are okay in the syntax or not.

EAO: There is a close parallel in current MessageFormat for `match`. The keyword `match` here takes on a similar role to `plural`, `ordinal`, etc. in current MessageFormat.

ZBI: My concern is that these keywords are in English, and then you have message patterns in the source language in which the source language is also English, it becomes confusing to authors. I wonder what the experience is for users when they see the syntax for the first time -- how easy it is for them? The other argument is that a person who is reading a MFv2 message is someone who is reading 1 million such MFv2 messages, and they are already familiar with the syntax. In other words, the benefits for a first-time user and the benefits for a heavy user may be opposed to each other. I'm concerned when keywords become a part of the message that look like English words, but I am not against it.

MIH: I'm torn, like ZBI. I approved the PR for the reason that it solves issues like the indecision of whether the parser should start in "code mode" or not, and proposals on that topic were very irregular. What I envision is that, as a developer, you are used to writing design docs and code, and only once in a while you author a message. You don't spend a lot of time writing messages, and often times they are simple messages (not ones with selections including plurals). I'm curious to put it out there and see what the reaction is.

RCA: I like the idea of trying it out and seeing what happens.

STA: I like what MIH said. I want to address the concern of ZBI about what experienced users will say. When I think about my own experience with regex's, I've probably written thousands of them, but I have never remembered the syntax, and always had to consult documentation about it. It won't be a syntax that people study and then be passionate about. Maybe this concern is a little bit smaller now that we're considered always delimiting translatable text. Whereas in Fluent, translatable text was not delimited, and so \_\_\_\_.

ZBI: STA, I think that counter-argument is a weak one. You're still asking a user to look ahead to the word `when`, then look ahead to the opening bracket, in order to figure out what the selector values are.

ECH: Why I continue to point out that: 1) we need to have delimiters for the selector value tuples and selector definitions, and that 2) the keywords should be optional because we should not replace the representation of data with these keywords. Looking forward to when languages with data literal syntax can create libraries that can use native data structures idiomatically to represent the message instead of a large "stringly-typed" string that is required of languages that don't have data literals in C++, Java, Rust, and Scala.

Consensus for https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/255 - we are ok to use {} instead of []
