### December 19th, meeting Attendees
- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- Addison Phillips (APP) 
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts: 

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

### Agenda

- Group Chair - Next Steps
  * December Meetings
  * Next milestones
- Review [Open Issues](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Ablocker-candidate) and [PRs](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pulls)

 ## Admin

- Cancel all meetings until 9th January  - Done 
- Move Jan 16 plenary to the week after - Done 

## Group Chair - Next Steps
 
RCA: Waiting for volunteers to be a chair of the group. Otherwise, we have to put it to a vote and coordinate with Unicode.
 
APP: I believe we are only waiting for CLDR to formalize this, but I have volunteered to 
 
ECH: +1
 
ECH: Talking about this , I also want to bring up the Chair Group, I do believe that is important to re-activate again.
 
EAO : I propose that APP send a proposal about how group should be organized, if chair group should be included or ideas about the organization.
 
APP: I will send out emails and announcements around this accordingly.
 
STA: It would be good to review the reasons for why the Chair Group was formed. 
 
APP: I’m open to suggestions, we suspect that we’ll have a discussion of the cadence of our meetings, and what our deliverables for this upcoming year. The first release of CLDR and Unicode is early in the year. The next release is later in the year.  I think we all share a desire to getting close to done, and in a maintainable shape, this year, so I will help drive towards that.
 
ZBI: In my mental model, there are 4 big blockers. 
One is Bidi, and that relates to how format to parts to work, which is the biggest blocker. 
Second is error handling.
Third is lessons learned from the design of a message resource format. I wouldn’t block on the message resource, but it would be nice to know that a resource format could be designed on top of the MessageFormat API. 
Also, I would like to see that operational bindings, like Flutter/DOM/React. I would like to see how those work.
 
EAO: Also, function registry - how is it defined? How much of it do we implement?
 
STA: I was also going to say the function registry, but also error handling, how much is defined, and how much 
 
APP: For me, I want to know what are our gating criteria, and when those deadlines are. In W3C, we like to see 2 implementations. I know we have implementations in the works. Those might be a lower bar than all the things that ZBI mentioned. Would could have formatters working while we check off other desired goals.
 
EAO: We also don’t have the exact algorithm of which variants/selection case messages, and we should try to specify that in case we realize after trying to implement it that we need to rethink things.
 
ZBI: In terms of implementations, there is an ICU4J, a pure JS and Rust between at least two of them we can achieve the goal of 2 implementations. For Rust I got stuck on the BiDi.  I couldn’t use the pattern on the implementation, so I agree with the timeline APP proposed, I will try to continue working on the implementation. Not understanding how formatToParts works with BiDi is my main blocker. Registry is also important but not blocker at this point.
 
STA: One more thing to add to things we are missing is markup inside translations, so we should figure it out, we agreed that we will parse matching “tags” so far. To what ZBI was saying, these are all good points, but am I not clear how much of that belongs in this group, and how much about the runtime that we want to enforce in this group.
 
ZBI: I’m also concerned about this and how users will end up using it, implementations interpret the current specification and the definition of Done could be unclear, The work I’m doing will rely on the current MF2.
 
EAO: Markup needs to be defined, the current syntax is … , but we have to write a second implementation, the ICU4C starts to appear. I would be happy about this. 
 
APP: I think it’s a good idea for us to catalog what our normative requirements for specification. What is inside and what is outside. For example, the BiDi would be nice to have but we’ve excluded it from 1.0’s conformance criteria. Here is the checklist of things to be considered done. If the results of that are not useful, but I suspect whatever we put on that list will be useful, and current MessageFormat is already useful, and I think what we have is already better than that. The more we define what is in and what is
 
ECH: if you’re going to have a C/C++, just do it in ICU4C. Haven’t talked to their TC to see if it is on their agenda. Already have a Java, want to be consistent. Otherwise it’ll be more confusing.
 
EAO: The shape of the API I need is smaller than ICU4C. Be happy to work on one, but what I’d be doing would be smaller.
 
ECH: I think it would be confusing if we had two competing C/C++ implementations, one of them in ICU4C, in addition to the implementations in Java (ICU4J), JS, and maybe Rust (ICU4X). 
 
RCA: Igalia is also interested in an ICU4C so I’ll follow up offline
 
## PRs Review


#### Add error handling #320
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/320/files
 
EAO: Presenting the issue
 
ECH: Did the group previously discuss and agree to the part of the PR that says “In all cases, when encountering an error,a message formatter must provide some representation of the message.”?
 
APP: In my experience at Amazon, once you have constructed a message, you only want to entertain errors, not throws (things that can be caught and handled). Once there is an error, it’s hard to have a meaningful message, so you only want to treat the message as broken and an error. So I could entertain the position that the formulation of that statement is wrong. Have you thought about considering the possibility of doing something different in the error case.
 
EAO: That would be interesting to consider returning the type of error, and let the runtime choose how to handle it. There is some work needed on my side to mark the PR from draft to ready to merge
 
ECH: Just want to check when MIH would be around to have enough time to review PR.
 
ZBI: After reading the notes, I disagree with APP, my mental model evaluates a localizations system as core , and we should set as baseline when everything is broken, so everything after is an improvement. IMHO everything should be static analyzed before runtime, and no errors should happen on runtime … (Zibi ?)
 
APP: My [comment on the PR](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/320/files#r1052458671) had 2 parts. The phrase reads, “The selector may only match the catch-all VariantKey `*`.”  The word “may” is suggestive, but the word “only” suggests “must”.
 
ZBI: I think we should give the best possible result to the user instead of only making/showing  an error or show empty thing , can we do better than that ? 
 
APP: A point I was trying to make is to enumerate all of the possible cases of results. One example is to return errors, including up to a fatal error, because if you can’t return something meaningful, there is nothing to act on. Another position is EAO’s idea of returning “[???]” even though it is not useful to or actionable by the user, because it is like saying “shame on you” to the localization team responsible for the message.
 
ZBI: I’m separating parsing error from resolution errors, I do believe that parser errors should at least have something usable , resolution errors we should avoid or throw. 
 
APP: The case I had in mind, There is an error within an selector and you match `*` , and you have several cases and you have an error on selector but I don’t want to match the `*` just because of that error, so might be an error but if selector still matching one of the values I can report and get the best resolution by matching on selector at least if possible.
 
EAO: There is a category that I forgot, It’s a catch all part that I should add to the PR, the second thing is how we handle BiDi , we have a fallback representation and a `$` representation …how do we start/end isolation for this ?  They probably would match all each other so the representation of this things needs to be thought carefully.
 
STA: We also allow this PR to land in an incomplete state , so we can iterate after, I feel this conversation would continue in loops with new use cases, so we if we have this PR landed we can set as baseline for approaching the problem.
 
APP: Yeah, I think this valid and implementation experience would also help us.
 
### Use inclusive language #319
 
EAO: We should merge it during this meeting 
 
#### Conclusion 
Merge it 
 
### Specify 'format to parts' (issue #272) #318
 
APP : Should we wait for MIH on this ?
 
EAO: Should we have this sort of discussion as a separated document ? 
 
APP: OK, are you concerned about this ? 
 
EAO : I’m afraid we are not clear on the scope of this, so we should determinate more clearly the deliverables of implementation 
 
APP: We should clarify this
 
ECH: there may be concerns about the language, the wording of it
 
 
#### Add Bidirectional Isolation section to formatting #315
 
EAO: Not sure what’s blocking PR to be merged
 
APP: IMHO what’s blocking is about the base direction, so I  think wording needs some updates. 
 
APP: Mark made a suggestion on comment that I think is close to what you mention, and describes when isolation is required, APP and EAO want to allow when returning isolation, they aren’t incompatible 
 
EAO: I want to BiDI Behaviour to be testable , without reference to implementation details , like handlers or resolutions works, but end up with something in spec that lead us that we support BiDi while allow a different algorithm to be used by implementations. Because in cases we don’t include tests for isolation might originate some miss interpretation.
 
EAO : I will take another look at PR and try to have it ready for next meeting
 
#### Add examples for multiline/complex resources for other languages #278
 
EAO : This is stale 

APP: What we should do here ? Close , comment ? 

APP: I’ll add comment , and if now updates we can close it  
 
 
#### MF2.0 compromise syntax #266
 
STA: This was an experiment about the syntax ,I pinged Markus, I wanted to archive this work.
 
EAO: We can do a merge to experiments branch 
 
STA : I can do it
 
##### Conclusion

Merge this on experiments branch 
 
 
#### Add consensus decision on formatting function context #197
 
EAO : We can address this when talking about function registry 
 
##### Conclusion

Review as soon as we talk about function registry 
 
 
### FormatToParts 
 
EAO: Should we define how formatToParts should be specified , if part of spec or part of implementation
 
ZBI: IMHO , we have to understand the implications of not specifying this would make all the bindings specific to an implementation, so we cannot swap over implementations. So we are limited when trying to be cross-env, I’m fine with us having to adapt to bindings when changing from implementations , so I would like to see at least a recommendation in how certain things are handled. I feel that ECMA402 would be the follow example for other implementations. I wonder on each the right mental model we should choose, should we define what formatToParts should return 
 
APP: I like what’s MIH added, my mental thinking that formatters inside formatters can have their own formatToParts so we only can worry about one layer not worrying about parts/sequences. 
 
EAO: I agree that formaToParts in ecma402 would have an impact on implementations, I would argue overall this work much be easier if we don’t duplicate this spec work in both sides, so we should get standardization of this using by agreeing with what’s other implementation are doing agreeing that example ECMA spec would could be used as reference for other implementations.
 
ZBI: I understand APP you’re saying , ECMA specifies so this goes back to other backends. I’m ok staying on this level but if we have to have to specify for ECMA-402 
 
RC: interoperability is one of the key points. I think it should be done at the level of the MF spec. ECMA-402 will influence a lot. Should take some examples of formatToParts from ECMA-402 as examples. What I mean is that I would like to see 402 as the main reference but see it in mf2
 
EAO: I’m having trouble with finding why we can specify this that works with implementations
 
ZBI: We are trying to make MF compatible with different use cases, DOM localization and …  so formatToParts is necessary to understand what registry returns, so if there is  a ref chain it should all be part of the binds on fToParts.
 
APP: I think an infinite deep bucket resolution is not a localizable solution, I do agree that a certain level of nesting can happen. We have to be able to define a part , a structure and common use cases for it.
 
EAO: If we follow this we might end defining constrictions that might end up in an sub optimal results for implementation
 
APP: Maybe we can define something like a data structure or something like that to implementations can 