### May 16th, meeting Attendees

- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- Daniel Minor - Mozilla (DLM)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Batjaa Batbold - Amazon (BAT)
- David Filip - XLIFF TC, Huawei (DAF)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)

## Auto Transcription

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

May 23, 2022

### Agenda

- Admin - 5 min
  - 20th June - Plenary - move it to the 27th

## Retrospective on Syntax PR’s

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/266/files

ECH: What is the process to have consensus - PR’s / Design Docs / Slides or is there another way ?

I originally had concerns about the PR initiated by EAO for trying to merge to `main` based on our previous processes for doing things. Merging to `main` has had a certain meaning since the beginning that everyone’s concerns have been addressed, but this PR didn’t really attempt to do that.

I had concerns about the continuity of discussions started in the slide deck that were not really captured in the PR. I want to point out MIH’s effort to transfer those comments, that was really valuable. The discussions on the follow repo issues shows the importance of the comments and the importance of the continuity of discussions.

A PR for a syntax proposal was submitted on Friday by Markus. There are people concerned about it. What do we want to do about that?

STA: Thanks ECH for raising those concerns. There was a meeting for deciding on the `develop` branch. There is not a lot of our work captured in Github that occurs in other meetings and meeting notes.

Markus had a concern about an engineering mindset of several interrelated issues, and perhaps that is true, but I wish he hadn’t filed his PR. [clarification later on: … but instead filed separate issues with his very good feedback]

EAO: Agree with STA. My previous understanding was that STA and I would create a starting point for syntax discussions, and then we can take issues up one by one.

I hope the changes on syntax are proposed on the current document instead of having a new document with a new syntax

I agree that many of these issues are interlinked, but I think we should be able to have individual issues.

ECH : It’s important to make sure that all feedback independently of meeting participations are included and listened to. I was concerned about how people who don’t frequently attend meetings left feedback on the slides, and that would have been dropped on the floor until MIH had transferred the comments to those issues.

I believe that development and experimental branches technologically are pretty similar, so I still don’t understand the difference.

I don’t feel that the syntax proposals(merged) doesn’t reflect the EM proposal at all, and it doesn’t incorporate the comments from the slides. Markus has a PR for his own compromise syntax proposal, so what do we want to do about that?

STA: I want to clarify that I am happy that Markus gave us feedback, obviously. I want to address what ECH said about the EAO and STA PR not including the EM proposal syntax. When EAO, STA, and MIH discuss things amongst ourselves, it was a logistical problem to not be able to include MIH in those discussions. So having a PR the way it was was just a way to create a PR without having too many opinions that would complicate the PR.

EAO: What we presented in the PR was a work-in-progress. What we were looking for wasn’t comments and criticism, but instead input the final resolution. We got the feedback that we needed to finalize the proposal that we want to present to the group.

ECH: Based on the way that PR was created, there were existing viewpoints not represented, meaning that there were was room for those ideas to exist. Markus had his own PR, and based on the initial feedback there are people who agree with what he is saying, so I don’t think that discussion should be totally sidelined.

EAO: Absolutely. I don’t mean that at all. The second proposal that’s is in PR now have a shared baseline but differs in several ways and we have the issues to address this as separate conversation instead of having an all in one new PR.

STA: My understanding from back in January when discussing the proposals to the CLDR-TC when talking with MIH was that he was not entirely interested in the syntax so long as the data model is correct. And perhaps I took this too far in my interpretation, and took that in my discussions with EAO.

But it seems that MIH does have opinions on syntax, especially as it is a reflection of the features in the data model. So perhaps we should have run these ideas by him before creating our syntax proposal.

EAO: We should be having these conversations with anyone and everyone who is interested, and not just in a small clique.

RCA: Good, and now is the time to address that. My concern is whether we are going in the opposite direction because now we have another syntax proposal PR in addition to the first syntax proposal.

EAO: Let’s proritize the issues that we do have. Let’s identify what to work on next in order to proceed.

MIH: I didn’t talk to Markus about his PR or anything, but I’m afraid that the fact that he took the effort to submit it is a reflection that he feels very strongly about what he feels. So I’m concerned that a passive open request for feedback will postpone acting on the feedback, which feels important. We can ask directly if that is useful.

RCA: I think that would be useful.

STA: Maybe we can invite Markus here next week. Otherwise we are speculating.

RCA: Let’s add an action item to invite him.

STA: ECH, are you happy with how we are going about things?

Action Point:

- [ ] Invite Markus Scherer to the next Extended meeting to share thoughts about the PR

ECH : Communication is important, so I’m glad we’re having these conversations. I’m not sure if the process of filing several issues would work, based on how things have gone in the past. I have never been in favor of doing the same things over and over and expecting different results. So when we have been stuck, I have been interested in doing it in different ways to test if we can make more progress using different strategies. A year ago, around February/March, we were deadlocked in disagreement but couldn’t even agree that we disagreed, the response from people was to talk more with even fewer people than we had in our frequent 4 person huddles. That continued until the CLDR-TC stepped in at the end of the year. My question is, as a group what have we done that has worked in order to unblock and make progress ? Some of the recent progress was because the CLDR-TC + ICU-TC committee intervened and we spent 3 months creating concrete proposals and discussing them in committee meetings. But alone as a group, what have we done that has worked? My answer to STA’s question is with a question.

EAO: Can we just try to discuss the issues that we have and try to form a consensus?

RCA: It’s hard to say what worked and what didn’t, but some things worked, some things didn’t. We have made progress, but it’s always the consensus part that has been difficult.

STA: I think it’s important to analyze what has worked in a “blameless postmortem” type of way, but it’s also not useful to bash ourselves. Looking with some hindsight, we haven’t agreed what we want MFv2 to be. Until a few months ago when CLDR-TC asked for proposals, we hadn’t really delved into issues that are important. Why I think this time is different, is that if we use a public forum, then everything is recorded and out in the open.

I think we have the extended meetings to continue discussion, and even though I was a proponent of that, it has led to the communication gap that has caused problems.

RCA: Should we go on to the issues?

STA: What do we do about Markus’s PR? I think that’s the issue.

RCA: I think we have an action item to invite Markus and see what he thinks. We don’t know what the intention is, so we should wait to ask.

## Prioritise and resolve issues raised with the proposed syntax.

EAO: We have a request from the CLDR-TC that we have a technical preview of MFv2 ready for the ICU 72 release. That means that we would need a syntax ready in the next few weeks. Without having that outside pressure, it might be possible to discuss the issues that are blockers. Let’s go through the issues we have and determine which issues are blockers for the code for ICU 72 release.

MIH: I agree with this point, in order to have something delivered ultimately, we have to start getting into the details. I don’t expect us to address all issues, but if we can go through them and tag them as blockers for implementing the technical preview. I think we should also send out an invitation to the list

RCA: I have created another Project kanban board in the repo that we can use to pull issues into.

MIH: I prefer using labels instead of this process. It is hard to have multiple ways of tracking info.

STA: Github also has milestones. But I share MIH’s sentiment. Maybe one label could represent agreement, another label represents nomination. A new issue created for a blocker would get the nomination label, and if we all agree it is a blocker, then it gets the agreement label.

MIH: Sounds good.

RCA: Let’s create those labels now.

EAO: Can we use labels: blocker, backlog, wishlist.

STA: Do those labels map onto P0, P1, and P2?

Labels:

- backlog
- blocker
- wishlist

## Discuss how we may proceed in parallel with the other remaining parts of the spec, and figure out what is the true MVP scope for an initial implementation.

### [#269](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/269)

RGN: I filed this issue to make sure that it was captured, but it existed only in the email thread. It is something that I think should be resolved, but I agree that it doesn’t need to be a blocker for a technical preview.

### [#268](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/268)

RGN: I observed when going over the syntax proposal merged in the `develop` branch. Multiline strings are uncommon but not unheard of, so that merited special attention. Not a blocker for a technical preview.

### [#265](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/265)

EAO: Not a blocker

### [#263](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/263)

EAO: That is a blocker

STA: I agree that is a blocker, but it is very simple to change. It can change adoption very much, so I agree that it is a blocker.

### [#262](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/262)

STA: Markus was concerned about markup being too freeform, i think.

MIH: I think it is related to other issues that we have, and those are blockers. Ex: Is HTML a first-class markup citizen and all other markups are not, or

ECH: I think this is a blocker. This is really similar to the committee feedback on what it called “UI Elements”, here it is called “markup element”, but it’s really the same thing.

### [#261](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/261)

EAO: We can find out from Markus next week.

STA: Maybe there is a critical user journey that is missing from this and a few other related issues. I imagine the topic would be “what is the select and format mechanism?” We should find out from the TC. I don’t think this is a blocker itself.

### [#260](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/260)

STA: I think we talked about this with MIH lately, about how formatting and selection functions are preferred and valid. It is about the naming of default functions.

MIH: Markus has some similar thing detailed in his syntax PR.

STA: I think this is a registry issue.

MIH: I think for the implementation, it’s okay to design the APIs that can support either way. If we can’t agree that we need 3 categories of functions, then it’s a blocker.

EAO: Unless we have a registry, then we have to say it’s not a blocker. But it highlights that we should have a registry proposal ASAP.

MIH: I agree it’s not a syntax, but it is required for the implementation. So it’s not something that can be delayed.

STA: I agree with MIH.

RCA: So it is a blocker and it is registry.

MIH: Yes, but remember that it could still be a blocker even without a registry implementation.

### [#259](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/259)

STA: I don’t think this is a blocker.

EAO: Yes, this is a blocker. Going back on that decision would be difficult.

### [#257](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/257)

EAO: Blocker.

STA: Yes, it’s related to the preamble declaration.

### [#256](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/256)

STA: That is a blocker.

EAO: Agreed.

### [#255](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/255)

ECH: This is an issue that multiple have commented on. I didn’t have an opinion until I read their comments, and it makes sense. It has a linguistic related aspect that affects people’s

STA: I think it’s contentious enough that is should be a blocker.

### [#254](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/254)

EAO: This is not a syntax thing.

RCA: But is it a blocker?

STA: After MIH explained how important this is to leveraging, I think this is a blocker.

MIH: I think this is a blocker. yes. It’s not data model, it is actually mostly syntax, but still it is a blocker. It affects how you handle the keys.

STA: Okay, even more reason for it to be a blocker.

### [#253](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/253)

STA: This is something that Markus’s PR has, and Addison was a proponent of.

EAO: Isn’t this related to a previously discussed issue?

STA: No, that was about patterns, this is about keys.

EAO: Okay, then it’s a blocker.

### [#252](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/252)

STA: That is a blocker

MIH: Blocker

EAO: Blocker

### [#251](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/251)

STA: Similar to the issue that Markus had about making selectors stand out. This one is about the entire preamble. It is not clear whether it includes local variables or not. Probably a blocker.

### [#249](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/249)

EAO: Based on discussions with ZBI, not a blocker.

### [#248](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/248)

STA: Not a blocker

MIH: Not a blocker, but the more we kick this can down the road, the more difficult it becomes.

ECH: Maybe it’s not a blocker, but it gets really annoying when people assume “Placeable” is an interface because it ends in “-able”, and we’ve already had this discussion before and we’re having it again. As I said earlier, we also had misunderstanding earlier today looking at an issue on “markup syntax” when the CLDR-TC committee had referred to it as “UI Elements” because that’s what a proposal used.

STA:

### [#247](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/247)

STA: I think this issue is a blocker

EAO: This could be something we can defer as a blocker until we hear from Markus.

STA: But I think MIH is right, I understood Markus’s PR as him being strongly against one of those use cases.

MIH: I’m also against the argument being a function option.

STA: We can leave it as a non-blocker and work on specifying it better.

### [#246](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/246)

STA: Probably not a blocker.

EAO: Can we just say that they just need to be delimited somehow?

MIH: Yes, I agree, it doesn’t have to be quotes.

STA: There is a separate issue for what the delimiter should be, but this issue is about _whether_ there should be a delimiter.

STA: There is no rush on this.

### [#245](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/245)

MIH: I don’t see it is a blocker.

### [#244](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/244)

STA: I don’t know how to resolve this.

MIH: For me, it’s clear that the title question’s answer is “yes”. So it’s fine to move on, but it’s not solely my decision to make.

STA: Not a blocker.

### [#243](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/243)

STA: I can close this and reference the related issue.

STA: Actually, I think this issue was about

### [#242](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/242)

EAO: I think this connected to allowing whitespace.

STA: I think this is completely a blocker, and we should resolve it with the non-controversial thing, which is a sigil.

EAO: Sure.

### [#241](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/241)

MIH: I think it is a blocker if you look at the bigger picture.

ECH: Do you remember the CLDR-TC

EAO: My sense was content in curly braces is special, but not all content in curly braces is variable references or placeholders.

STA: The committee resolution doc on UI elements says the “introducer begins with a { “

ECH: Addison had a comment saying that this is something that should be handled outside of MF, say by your “Translation Manamagent System (TMS)” or some other process. I agree. So there is a related question about whether we should even be doing this, so this is a blocker.

MIH: I propose that we have move ahead if we all agree that it is a blocker.

### [#240](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/240)

EAO: Does everyone agree that we should add a standalone markup element to the spec?

MIH: I find it strange that we have things like in HTML bold and links are markup elements, but images are placeholders.

STA: Agreed.

RCA: So this is a blocker, until we say otherwise.

### [#239](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/239)

STA: This is a duplicate of the previous #240. Please reference the previous issue when closing this one.

### [#238](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/238)

STA: I think these concerns should be explained. MIH can you explain?

MIH: I can explain, but not better than the already existing comments. It’s about namespacing. The namespace is a potential solution to this.

STA: I thought this was more about being able to use

MIH: Potentially, sure, why not?

STA: Well, Latex doesn’t using markup, right?

EAO: If we add namspacing, then we don’t have to have this is a blocker.

STA: I think namespacing is a blocker, even though it is jumping

RCA: Is everyone okay with this not being a blocker?

ECH: Isn’t this basically related to other things that are blockers.

STA: We can just prefix everything with “html\_”

MIH: No, that won’t work. That will force ICU or any implementation to know ahead of time what all types of markup will exist and have special code to know how to handle them when they are encountered.

ECH: It sounds to me that it is a blocker, and if it is a duplicate of something else, then it is easy to close.

STA: If we follow that logic, then all of our syntax proposal followup issues

### [#237](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/237)

MIH: I think this is related to the other discussion on placeholders. It is about how to wrap literals or not.

EAO: Can we close this or just let it be?

MIH: I think this will be self-resolved once we decide how to wrap string literals and option values in placeholders.

### [#236](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/236)

EAO: Not a blocker because resource syntax is not a blocker

### [#235](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/235)

EAO: I think we are all clear that this is an error, as it currently is.

MIH: Yeah, it is an error.

### [#234](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/234)

EAO: We currently don’t have Unicode escape sequences, and I am not proposing that we add them explicitly. We can close unless someone thinks differently.

### [#233](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/233)

EAO: Not a blocker

### [#209](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/209)

EAO: This is an issue that is related to the syntax that I raised in November last year. So we are done with the issues related specifically to our recent syntax proposals. Let’s not do anything with this issue.

### [#160](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/160)

EAO: I don’t think this is a syntax issue.

MIH: No, it’s not. It’s ancient because it is more than 1 year old.

RCA: Okay, then let’s remove the “syntax” label from it.

RCA: How many total blocker issues do we have? Is that all?

MIH: Well, we will probably have more after we extend a call for others to file other blocker issues, whether they are syntax or not.

EAO: Let’s also encourage people to comment on issues so that we can work asynchronously so that we can make progress.

STA: Do we want to add these issues to the milestone? Have you talked about that?

EAO: We don’t have another thing besides the technical preview to deliver, so a milestone wouldn’t help.

RCA: So are we all ready?

EAO: We should address all of the blockers for the technical preview, that are beyond just the syntax.

RCA: If we get Markus here next week, would it be possible to ask him?

EAO: Adding a meta blocker issue of noting that we need to resolve this. I can do this.

STA: Back to the question of the milestones, from the point of view of a newcomer to the repo who adds an issue that doesn’t get the label “blocker”, they may wonder what does “blocker” mean. So having a milestone allows us to clarify

CUJs:

1. How do I select-and-format?
1. How do I use non-HTML UI elements?

Action Point:

- [ ] Invite Markus Scherer to the next Extended meeting to share thoughts about the PR
