### April 4th, meeting Attendees

- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)
- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Addison Phillips - Amazon - (APP)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Batjaa Batbold - Amazon (BAT)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Prithvi Shah - Amazon (PSH)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

Apr 18, 2022

### Moderator : Rômulo Cintra

### Agenda

- MessageFormat Stage 1 at TC39 Plenary
- CLDR-TC Resolution
- Continue discussion about Syntax - create requirements document for the syntax.
  - Single vs Multi line messages
  - Should we minimize the volume and the syntax for simple cases - minimal needed syntax ?
  - Error Fallback options
  - Should the syntax be agnostic and be used across different platforms ?
  - Should we take this as an example/starting point https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/test/formattest.xsd

## CLDR-TC Resolution

RCA:

The following is the document that records the guidance from the CLDR-TC and ICU-TC committee meeting.

(Note: outline formatting of lower-latin and lower-roman is flipped due to Github markdown parser bug)

<blockquote>
<ol style="decimal">
   <li>Aliases / macros</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li><b>Agreed to have with any placeholder’s contents: {$count @number minFractions=15}</b></li>
      <li><b><i>Broader contents (eg a sequence like “{$count} books”) is for a future MF2.X</i></b></li>
   </ol>
   <li>XLIFF compat</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li>The syntax should be embeddable (keep the mapping in mind)</li>
      <li><b><i>To be done in parallel work on a module for XLIFF, not part of the tech preview</i></b></li>
   </ol>
   <li>Function registry</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li>Should contain enough information to test for syntactic validity, and tooling metadata (eg a <i>unlocalizable</i> attribute)</li>
      <li>Could point to a “authority” spec for expected behavior</li>
      <li>Needs signatures for both selection and format</li>
      <li>There is no special status for number and datetime functions/datatypes in the spec. They would also be in the registry.</li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>Will need to handle many different datatypes (eventually): dates, times, numbers, currencies, number ranges, durations, date ranges, unit measures, people names, lists, and other future datatype/functions</li>
      <li>Literals - need language-independent string binding for input</li>
         <li>for dates/durations we have ISO format</li>
         <li> Eg {“2022-02-22” @date}</li>
         <li>. Possibly set of regular expressions for syntactically valid literals (for function)</li>
      </ol>
      <li>Minimal contents of the common registry at launch covers numbers and dates</li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>TODO: flesh out how a “common” registry and “custom” registries interact.</li>
      </ol>
      <li>lifecycle: versioning (e.g., add options) & deprecation of
      functions</li>
   </ol>
   <li>Selecting variant messages based on selectors </li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li><b>Use a first-match approach.</b></li>
      <li>Any specially ordering needs to be done on the tooling side.</li>
      <li>Selector functions need to produce some additional info to make that possible. In particular whenever one selector value overlaps with another. For example the plural categories “=1” and “one” both match the value 1. </li>
      <li>From a set of selector values, a function needs to also distinguish the best “fallback” value. That is so that messages generated in the past can continue to work if a new selector value is added for that message’s language. An example is “other” for any set of plural category values. That would be used for the _ value in Staś document.</li>
   </ol>
   <li>UI Elements</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li>We do need something like the <...> in the EM document: “opaque” elements, with maybe some localizable embedded elements, but most parts are not localizable.</li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>Should not assume well-formedness of elements (ex: official HTML spec + HTML docs in the real world)</li>
         <li> Related to localizing text in an embedded image inside of a message.</li>
      </ol>
      <li><b>Introducer is {...} with some syntax that indicates a UI element.</b></li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>That is, {...} indicates a non-literal, but could be a placeholder or a UI element. There should be enough reserved character patterns that we have room for future extensions</li>
      </ol>
   </ol>
   <li>Metadata (information for localization tooling. Not needed for runtime)</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li>Eg description of placeholders</li>
      <li><b>Agreement to have basic metadata for localization tooling, at least key/value pairs from registry.</b></li>
      <li><b><i>The rest is out of scope for MF2.0. May consider a separate format/data model for MF2.X</i></b></li>
   </ol>
   <li>Output of formatting</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li><b>Format to string</b></li>
      <li><b><i>And</i> format to parts/structure</b></li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>The spec can illustrate a sample output structure, but the precise structure will probably be implementation-dependent</li>
         <li> Accessibility/TTS is an issue</li>
      </ol>
   </ol>
   <li>VariableRef mechanism</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li>Need clarity on what happens with a mismatch between input and function (numberRange passed to date function)</li>
      <li><b>Investigate in parallel whether we can have placeholders “results” affect the formatting of other placeholders, eg “agreesWith:...”.</b> </li>
      <li><b>Add to MF 2.0 if the investigation concludes in time. Don’t introduce restrictions that would preclude later introduction. See also</b></li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li><a href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/1chYpSuzE4JnxdDD34hV2mMmoyThMpb4DaroANGL9xfg/edit?usp=sharing">Grammatical Agreement in MessageFormat 2.0</a></li>
         <li><a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1buYL9VN5DTI-PkS11P5RmuXm3QdlmQamkR4IitVfQSA/edit">George’s (Siri) Proposal</a></li>
      </ol>
   </ol>
   <li>What can a function see?</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li><b>For MF2.0, just the placeholder contents (value, options) plus locale, optionally plus other info, like context.</b></li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>Exact format is implementation-dependent.</li>
         <li> Grammatical/phonetic agreement (eg ‘a unique’ vs ‘an undertaking’) may require a separate pass over the “format to parts” output</li>
      </ol>
      <li><b><i>Visibility of the rest of the message variant or whole message awaits MF2.X</i></b></li>
   </ol>
   <li> Variables (names of input values that aren’t literals)</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li>Must be usable in statically-typed programming languages.</li>
      <li>Opaque to the message format (but of course the value must be appropriate for the function).</li>
      <li>The syntax can allow the ‘.’ in a variable identifier, but the interpretation is implementation-defined.</li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>$length ⇒ $length.number $length.unit</li>
      </ol>
      <li><b>Exact syntax of variables is TBD, leaning towards simple.</b> </li>
   </ol>
   <li> Message references - incorporating external messages</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li><b>Can be done using functions for those who need it right away.</b></li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>Eg {“ID3457” message}</li>
      </ol>
      <li><b><i>Could consider other syntax in an MF2.X</i></b></li>
   </ol>
   <li> Message bundles</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li><b>Not in MF2.0.</b> This is currently done by higher levels (eg XLIFF) in many implementations.</li>
      <li><b><i>Could consider adding as an optional item in an MF2.X, or as separate Message Bundle spec, or Message Group spec. For discussion in parallel.</i></b></li>
   </ol>
   <li> Note: Syntax must allow for selection after formatting (or together with)</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li>Example: input might be 0.3 meters, with the unit-measure function then picking the best unit for the locale. That requires formatting before the selection, because: </li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>it can be emitted in a different measure (0.9842… feet) which has a different gender. So the gender for selection can vary.</li>
         <li> and rounded to 1 or 1.0 or 0.98 or … according to the format options, which affects the pluralization (fractions can have special plurals), so the plural category for selection can vary.</li>
      </ol>
      <li>Notes:</li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>Could be supported via macros/aliases, so that the format of all placeholders (whose values are used in selection) are defined together.</li>
         <li> Easy for translators/developers to make this mistake, important to make it hard to make the mistake.</li>
         <li>. EM solves by having # vs. $ for different variables (formatted+selected / unformatted) [ not nec. agreed to!.]</li>
      </ol>
      <li><b>Need to include, precise syntax TBD</b></li>
   </ol>
   <li> Metadata (not for localization tooling; eg has runtime effect)</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li><b>Make sure that the syntax in MF2.0  is extensible enough to support this in MF2.X.</b> </li>
      <ol style="list-style-type: lower-roman">
         <li>Consider the “envelope” analogy.</li>
      </ol>
      <li><b><i>Postpone this to MF2.X</i></b></li>
   </ol>
   <li> Recoverability for bad syntax</li>
   <ol style="list-style-type: lower-latin">
      <li>General consensus among attendees (but not everyone could be here) is that we are better off making sure that the messages are well formed, rather than complicating the parser. Haven’t seen a use case where recoverability within the parser is essential (as opposed to validation/recovery in localization tools). Also we haven’t had a compelling example where a change in syntax would “improve” recoverability.</li>
      <li><b><i><u>However, not everyone could be there, so leave this open to further investigation for MF2.0.</u></i></b></li>
  </ol>
</ol>
</blockquote>

MIH: I am okay calling macros as aliases. The exact name is not important to me.

EAO: When we discussed, we called macros / aliases as "local variables". Another point was that assigning values to local variables should be easy so that actual users do this.

EAO: Nothing to add about a function registry except that we need one.

RCA: For UI Elements, we need an introducer syntax.

ECH: For the benefit of the group here, I wanted to point out that "UI Elements" discussions also was interpreted in the committee discussions to apply to any type of region that has a start and end, so it doesn't apply only to UI widgets, but is more generally applicable than that.

APP: I want to make sure that I understand -- this is referring to any type of markup or markup placeholders and inclusions, right? Has anyone given thought to paired and unpaired placeholders?

MIH: Yes.

EAO: Yes.
ZBI: I’m also keeping track of how the design of pair vs standalone can be potentially extensible to relations beyond pair - for example triplets of related elements (start/middle/end etc.)

APP: Is there mention to any runtime convention?

EAO: That is later in the doc?

MIH: The convention is metadata that you only need at runtime. The rest that you need for translation is just called data because it's the "real data".

EAO: The point on formatting output is that we are not limited to just an output type of string.

RCA: On the topic of VariableRef mechanism --

EAO: There are 2 parts here that the CLDR-TC + ICU-TC didn't comment much on because the discussion went on too long already. One is whether we want to have variables specified where their specific formatting type/function is not specified. The committee said that formatting functions should only use what values are passed to them, and we can try to investigate in parallel, and to be considered only if the investigation concludes before MF 2.0, otherwise can be considered for a later MF 2.X iteration.

EAO: Variable names should be, effectively what I get get out of this is that variable names should be kind of same and look a little bit like variable names but can contain characters like a period that a separate parse effectively can interpret as splitting up the the variable name into path parts. If an implementation chooses to consider or allow input values to have some sort of hierarchy, then that can be supported.

MIH: I think the description is accurate, but we have to understand that this has big implementation implications. In the existing MF, the library is required to take the name of the argument and pass that to the formatting function. In a formulation that wants to use segmented path style identifiers, the engine (formatting function)

ECH: What I recall from the meetings is that it's not that we're reserving a dot as a special character, it's that if you choose a dot or semicolon or whatever, separator for any type of path style identifier that's implementation specific. And the handling of that is also implementation specific.

APP: I understand from their standpoint that only implementations that make use of reserved characters for segmented paths, and if you don't use it,

ZBI: I want to make the point that the use of a dot as a path separator as something that will impact the topic in

EAO: (Item 11) Let's do consider later whether we do them, make sure that in the syntax, there's a slot available for them. If need be But not yet. Message bundles were decided to leave it out of MF 2.0, but to take it up latter in MF 2.X.

ZBI: Also, we discussed that it is TBD where the appropriate place for such a message bundle spec should be housed. Value of Unicode housing this spec, vs. letting ECMA/W3C come up with their own. ZBI suggests that if Unicode is reluctant to take it, then leave it to ECMA/W3C and consider for Unicode “adoption/blessing” later on to avoid unnecessary fragmentation.

ZBI: I really wish we didn't use "bundle" - it's resource syntax :) bundle can also be used at runtime for collection of interrelated messages and then I'd prefer "context". So, I'd advocate for "resource" (store)/"context" (runtime) and no "bundle" at all

MIH: I believe that item 13 is only referring to behavior, and in particular, the selection only operates on values after they are formatted. That is because the formatting output affects how selection must be performed.

ZBI: I believe George’s proposal addresses it very well.

EAO: Similar to message references, the feedback was along the lines of "let's not do it now, but let's not prevent the possibility of doing it later"

ECH: For item 15, the general consensus was that the proposed feature was not given with a clear problem statement defined,

EAO: My take is that the committee sees the feature as out of scope of the spec.

ZBI: I believe that this is an unfortunate situation because I wanted to discuss it with the committee before I left early, but

APP: I think I am in agreement with EAO's last statement that we have a lenient parser that can fail on things that are errors, but it would be bad if we had an entirely lenient parser that would allow completely junk data to go into production.

EAO: This got covered during the last 15 minutes of the whole TC considering things. And I did feel like it was missed an opportunity to shine. I would recommend that we schedule for next Mondays extended call. I presume we're having an extended call next week to talk about this specifically, Rather than going into really the depths of what we mean by recoverability and what would be good, what would be bad during this meeting.

MIH: For people who advocate for recoverability for bad syntax to look at the existing specs, for example in programming languages. Different compilers of a language can do different things when they encounter syntax errors because the behavior is not defined. I would like to see examples.

ECH: If we decide to discuss this further, I would like to see a clear problem statement, with alternatives, and each with their pros and cons.

APP: forward compatible syntax seems like a good idea (reserved syntax), but I'm in agreement with MIH

ZBI: I don't think this is an issue that needs pros and cons, it should be important to do regardless. It would be like saying that performance has tradeoffs, but better performance is a value, better performance is always desirable, not something .

STA: I think robustness is a great value, but I'm sure there is a spectrum to it. ZBI, if you don't want to talk about pros and cons, then explain why you think a robustness as an incontrovertible value, then maybe you can explain why.

EAO: Next week Monday ZBI will lead a discussion on robustness.

## Requirements list for syntax

Single line vs Multine messages -
Should we minimize the volume and the syntax for simple cases - minimal needed syntax ?
Error Fallback options
Should the syntax be agnostic, in order to be used in different platforms ?
Should we take this as an example/starting point https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/test/formattest.xsd

MIH: This is too short notice. I only received this meeting's agenda before the meeting, so I haven't had time to think about it.

EAO: Reiterating the current situation -- at the last meeting, we decided that STA and I would create the first proposal for a syntax. We talked about topics to consider for a syntax. We haven't created a document yet, but we are inviting others now to collaborate on the document that we will create.

RCA: Let's fill this out offline. Let's have comments contributed in the next 2-3 days. Let's proceed to GWR's presentation.

Offline comments & additions

EAO: Add your items here.

## George's presentation on syntax

EAO: Could we timebox test because we're gonna run out of time today in any case and it would be really important to get the syntax feedback for stationary to do our work.

STA: Can we discuss this in a later meeting in more detail?

GWR: I am open to discussing this further.

EAO: How about somebody puts up a document shares it with everyone for collecting requirements, for the syntax. We gather that offline and currently schedule a call for later this week like Thursday or Friday for checking up on whether we've got everything covered and go on from there. How does this sound so that we can give George effectively the rest of this meeting for that? Effectively what I want, is a document that lists the requirements and goals. So that we have for the syntax that we can enumerate at this time.

—

[Presenting Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1buYL9VN5DTI-PkS11P5RmuXm3QdlmQamkR4IitVfQSA/edit#slide=id.g11f52b3fac7_2_67)

GWR: I wanted to cover my proposal for an implementation since there is a desire to move quickly with the current ones. I want to bring up three main concerns with the current proposals. 1) I don't think they typically address the typical linguistic problems that hands the translators. 2) There's been slow progress and we won't pass the proposed test cases that I provided like about last year about 11 months ago. 3) I just wanted to kind of briefly go over the existing proposals..

There's new custom syntax but it's something to consider and it's markdown just for comparison.

EAO: One particular thing that jumped out at me is that what we ended up in MF2 is design for how we represent messages and message resources. As we are including a implementation agnostic data model, we should include something like a canonical XML representation of that Data Model that represents that same DM ? This would make easy to import and use different messages across different implementations.

GWR My concern about transforming syntax to another different syntax might be overkill

EAO: I think we already have an agreement that we are going to define the data model for MF2. So it becomes relatively easy to say that if we want to represent messages in XML, this is way to do it.

STA: I’m happy to see a different proposal from what have been seen so far

On a high level, I think what you're proposing is a possible incarnation of the other models. How I think about the other proposals is that they can allow the encoding of the grammatical model into morphological glossaries plus a set of custom functions. IIUC, what you're proposing here is that some of that grammatical resolution is encoding directly in the standard. It's interesting and perhaps more advanced than what the other proposals are about.

GWR: You're right, I'm encoding more of teh grammatical model into the standard.

STA : And related to that, my 3rd question it’s about slide 27 , example how this constraints works ? How a constrain value makes to the runtime. How that term know about desired gender of the user ?

GWR: So, that's an excellent point. What you can do is you can provide a term like him her or it let's say. And what would have is like the first value, it actually have all the constraints with it potentially, that's that's one such example. The other possible example, is that in the back end, we've actually defined all the grammys that are valid forgiven language and the populate that that's possibility. There's also some people that want be able to provide custom pronouns and as far as custom pronouns, you know, maybe they want to be able to define whether that has a masculine or feminine or a neutral term or an undefined term, or maybe it's just not known and they need to be able to

STA : know that seal D For example. Now provides a list of grammatical features that are That exists in different languages. So something that could be used as well, but I think here's specifically, I was more wondering about like the expected API on the from the point of view of a, you know, like c++ developer, like how do they actually inject the, the current users Gender into a format call with this constrained space.

ECH: I’m curious to know the things you described can be represented through the 3 proposal , due that they have open this part , the question is - this can be supported by all 3 proposals ?

2nd thing was actually met a comment and it's actually praise. I mean, I just saw that you have pros and cons in some of the in a lot of the slides that you had for the different features. And, you know, I appreciate that. I mean, it allows me to focus on specifics and say, like, okay, well, I might have a disagreement here or maybe there's another con that should be added to the XML, at least, at least one. So just that's just praise.

The third thing is a higher level question, it's almost like a point of order. Which is that this is like a full-blown proposal. And as a I think STA mentioned it actually goes beyond even the scope of the proposals that were presented to the ICU

What do we want to do with this, is this going to be a proposal that the committee hasn't seen that, we need to consider. Is this going to be something that?

GWR:I'll just quickly say that as far as the Alternate proposals is, you know, is it possible? Yes. It is possible to handle that some operations that way. My concern is that it is too open-ended, it is too much of of Lego bricks and I I recommend providing a little bit more structure to constrain what is possible and improve interoperability kind of like house. The C language says the ants can be of very sizes and Um, some people thought well and can be 16 bits and other people. So 32. And I would like to reduce that kind of problem in the future and provide a little bit, more formal structure that supported. But yes, it can be for that way. And your second point. Thank you. And the third part as far as consensus when the goal here was just to provide something that was a little bit more concrete, less abstract and a starting point and I think as far as previous proposals, I want them to be Quick anyway.

APP: I think it's an audacious thing. A number of us in the NLG space are struggling with these ideas ourselves. But I think this is something that is difficult to take to developers and make them do something with it. So I agree with ECH that I would like to take the existing proposals and use them to solve the majority of the problems of existing customers and users.

GWR: You’re right maybe it’s overkill , I wanted to focus on the senses on the most actua MF doesn’t do this.

MIH: I have the same comment as ECH that it would have been nice to have it in front of the CLDR-TC + ICU-TC because it would have been nice to have their comments about this. This proposal came after that, and it only arrived for this meeting with short notice. I would have liked to see these several ideas in this proposal and taken separately

EAO: What do we do with this now? I think what we can think out of this is a lot of interesting and real use cases that we really ought to be solved with MF2 while keeping in mind that effectively what we do it doing at least with message from a 2.0 is figuring out very much. The MVP minimal viable product that we can have out of this spec that allows for other things to be done, we might fit this into the actual proposals.

ECH: I agree with what you said, EAO . I think the the high level point which I'm glad we're discussing, because I think that's really important. We should decide as a group, what we want to do here. I think we're beyond the point where we want to be entertaining, new proposals. And I think what we have with our proposals can support this idea. So that's my, my appeal to the group is that we continue with the the path that we're on right now.

EAO: The syntax that we are proposing. Is something that is More directly human editable than an XML. What I will my first comment on this is that I do think that it should be. In fact, relatively simple for us to include an XML message, specification as I'm Appendix or an annex to the spec that would enable exactly this sort of use. While also allowing for those environments for instance, where JSON is more popular or more easier to use to have a canonical JSON, specification for what a message looks like. And then also to have the syntax that Star Shania are working on, which is a canonical human friendly. representation,

RCA: Final reminder to please if you have requirements or wishes or other things about the syntax to add them to the notes by Thursday

Action Items / Questions :

- Decide and figure out the next steps for this new “proposal”
  - Should be used ad kind of canonical XML representation of DM ?
  - Annex of the spec ?
  - We are already beyond the timeline to include those ideias into the actual proposals ? How it can be done ? / They are compatible ?
  - Should we consider sharing this new “proposal” with CLDR-TC
- Fill the requirements lists
