#### February 28, meeting Attendees

- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia

- Batjargal Batbold - Amazon (BAT)

- Daniel Minor - Mozilla (DLM)

- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)

- David Filip - XLIFF TC, Huawei (DAF)

- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)

- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)

- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)

- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)

- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)


## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list]([https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg))

## Next Meeting



## Moderator : Rómulo Cintra

### Agenda

- Intl.MessageFormat - Stage I at TC39-TG2 ECMA-402 
  * [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1oThTeL_n5-HAfmJTri-i8yU2YtHUvj9AakmWiyRGPlw/edit?usp=sharing) 
  * [Proposal]([https://github.com/dminor/proposal-intl-messageformat](https://github.com/dminor/proposal-intl-messageformat))
  * Deadline for advancement eligibility: [March 18th, 2022 10:00 EDT](https://www.timeanddate.com/countdown/generic?p0=1440&iso=20220318T14&msg=TC39%20Submission%20deadline)
- Summary from past 2 extended meetings[#220](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/220) & [#221](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/221)  - Open debate and feedback 
- Compatibility Strategy
- Resource-level data model
- Junk in Data Model

RCA: Any questions about the agenda?

DAF: I’ve been following the emails about the CLDR request for proposals saying that they want to meet with a small number of champions, and I wonder if it would be possible to be a silent observer even if not a champion?

EAO: As a champion, I would like to know the details of the meeting and how to join.

RCA: Yes, we should find out more about the logistics.

## Intl.MessageFormat - Stage I at TC39-TG2 ECMA-402


* [Slides]([https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1oThTeL_n5-HAfmJTri-i8yU2YtHUvj9AakmWiyRGPlw/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1oThTeL_n5-HAfmJTri-i8yU2YtHUvj9AakmWiyRGPlw/edit?usp=sharing)) 
* [Proposal]([https://github.com/dminor/proposal-intl-messageformat](https://github.com/dminor/proposal-intl-messageformat))

RCA: I am adding to the notes that the deadline for the proposal stage advancement is March 18th, 2022 10:00 EDT

EAO: I created this as an evolution of the API for some of the JS Intl formatters, and then extend it specifically for MessageFormat. It would look different from the other Intl formatters, for reasons that will hopefully become clear.

The existing message format API has a data model and a runtime, and we need to consider those things separately.  `MessageData` don’t contain runtime values, so they belong in the constructor for `MessageFormat`, not in the interface for the `format()` function.

We should not be throwing an error but instead have an error handler for falling back, being different from Intl objects already doing, but it's a requirement due that data it’s mostly provided by user data. 

Next, we consider what is the data that we are building with. We want to build a message formatter not around a single message, but around a resource that contains multiple messages.

Two changes, parameter becomes a resource parameter and format message it’s a message ID, msgId can be a string or an array depending on…

Because the message hierarchy is not an array but potentially nested messages, we need to provide the message id not as a single string but as a path which is an array of strings.

The getMessage method will return a ResolvedMessage instead of a string that format method returns.

The reason we think it belongs as a part of core JS and not as a library is because we need to be able to accept a string that points to a `MessageResource` as well as a `MessageResource` value itself.

Another question that arises is if we should also have toString method.

The MessageValue part represents resolve message value the,

`ResolvedMessage` extends the `MessageValue` interface to be able to return an Iterable of `MessageValue`s.  We can also have interfaces that extend `MessageValue` for various more specific types of a `MessageValue`, like `MessageLiteral`, `MessageNumber`, `MessageDateTime`, etc.

In JS we have Numbers and BigInt’s representing numbers that might affect plural rules, regarding rendering error cases we have a representation of message fallback that can be found in resolved messages. For error handling the toString message or top level ErrorHandler in case an error it’s thrown we can captura error + message “source/value”. This would allow fallback message to work.

`MessageFallback` also extends `MessageValue`, but also its source should be kept confidential so that its value cannot be used somehow as an attack vector.

A message value may also have some metadata, which should be just a map of strings to strings.

There is a cost for adding a new object in JavaScript, every type identifier will help avoid addressing those concerns.

When we talk about `MessageFormatterFunction`, we can think about this as the “registry” as it has been referred to.  Functions have locals, options, and arguments.  An implementation should come included with at least implementations for datetime and number formatting functions.

That is the proposal. We have sources of certainty. The first is that the single-message syntax may be defined before message-resource syntax. We have not settled on how we are going to support what are considered in the EZ proposal as markup elements, whereas MIH has represented them as start (open) and end (close) placeholders.  Also, we want to consider user-defined custom pattern elements.

RCA: How is this aligned with the actual status with both EZ and EM proposals, and does that affect the ECMA proposal?  This proposal already has a well-defined structure, and I’m not sure how that matches the status 

EAO: Everything presented here is compatible with all 3 proposals.

MIH: I think it would have been useful to share the presentation in advanced as we’ve established already.  Next, I don’t think the proposal is compatible with all 3 proposals. One example is making the message value publicly visible outside, which is not implemented in all 3 proposals.

EAO: Okay, I understand that.

STA: I realize that the question of specifying the MessageResources is ahead of us and under discussion, so I’m not commenting about that. I think there is value, even if we allow working with resources, making the API centered around a single message rather than formatting by message id. I think I have a preference, which would be to allow users to create/manipulate a message interface, because then you can imagine scenarios where it’s easy to work with a message formatter and a collection of messages rather than to have to insert them into resources.  An example of this is how CSS rules look like and CSS styles look like.

EAO: The Intl.MessageFormat API does, at some point, need to support parsing a file into a representation of messages. So having an API around a single message would be possible but would add complexity.

STA: I’m not sure about complexity, but both of these approaches have some. Creating an instance of a ____

RCA: Regarding this part about parsing a file, this would involve a lot of different concerns. Perhaps this is not the venue to discuss that, but it would certainly touch a lot of other APIs. Should we discuss it here, since it would involve bringing in a loader, and dealing with a loader then requires ____.

EAO: Are you asking whether we should have a resource represented as a string at all?

RCA: I’m talking about how you said that we need to be able to read in a file.

EAO: When I said that a 

ECH: Simplicity it’s about taking things apart, deal with a collection with message includes to be able to deal with a message at time, starting with a single message will be simpler same analogy with deal with files instead of string, simplify will help us address things in simple and easy manner.  [https://github.com/matthiasn/talk-transcripts/blob/master/Hickey_Rich/SimpleMadeEasy.md](https://github.com/matthiasn/talk-transcripts/blob/master/Hickey_Rich/SimpleMadeEasy.md)

EAO: A lot of this comes down to whether we adhere to the first consensus that we agreed to about supporting message references. If we support that, then we need to consider these issues. As long as we have this functionality supported, then supporting both is the simpler API. But I’m happy to discuss what it looks like to take this forward.

MIH: I agree that some of the signatures are debatable, but I understand that this is all in flux and not considered final. Regarding taking a message reference / id and returning a message, there are other ways to return messages, such as having a function that does this. So I don’t think we should make the assertion that Resources are an unavoidable conclusion in making that work.

RCA: Since this is the last time we meet as a group before the ECMA presentation, it would be good if EAO and DLM that you can take the feedback and review it offline before the presentation. After we achieve the next stage, then there will need to be a lot of work to bring it to the next stage.

EAO: If people want to contribute, the best way would be via Github issues, because I don’t think I’ve captured everything said here in the meeting.

STA: What is the meaning of Stage 1?

EAO: It means that it becomes a thing that we are talking about.

RCA: Yes, Stage 1 is just the entry stage. And I believe that we have consensus on this.

## Summary from past 2 extended meetings

[#220](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/220) & [#221](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/221)  - Open debate and feedback

RCA: STA EAO MIH is there anything you would like to share with the group from the last 2 meetings?

EAO: I think there is an overlap with people attending those meetings and this one. Are there any decisions that we need to present to the group to make? It doesn’t seem so.

ECH: Are the notes for the previous meetings going to be in the repository and sufficiently describe those extra meetings’ discussions?

RCA: Yes, that is the intention.

ECH: Okay good, just checking.

## Compatibility Strategy

STA: We’ve been discussing in previous meetings that some things will be added later one and we don’t have any rule that defines a compatibility strategy. What kind of changes we will allow , or any other relevant facts of having this evolution strategy

EAO: We really ought to be explicit about saying what things we provide in the spec, and what things may change later. Hypothetically, if we come up with definitions in 2.0 that don’t include markup elements in the pattern elements, then maybe later in a 2.1 version we might need to include that, and we need to think about how that affects compatibility.

Figure out what we end up defining in the spec that generate any dependency being an external observable interface that affects compatibility and break those. 

Example : If we include in I/O the Data Model interface we have to provide retro-compatibility between 2.0 -> 2.1 -> 3.0 in future. 

STA: Generally, there are 2 sorts of compatibility that I’m interested in, and they’re sometimes confusingly called backwards and forwards compatibility. Backwards is when you have new tools working with old files. Forwards compatibility is old tools working with new files.

Normally programming languages offers backwards compatibility example in JavaScript

What do you think the localization industry is like? What kind of compatibilities should we be worrying about?

EAO: One key aspect is, if you come across a pattern element in the data model that you don’t support, we ought to define how you deal with that. Provide a way for as graceful fallback as possible.

We should define non-breaking compatibility. In the 2.0 spec, if something causes an error or fallback, we should say that it is possible for future changes to support some of those input cases in the future.

RCA: Although we don’t specify compatibility in the group, I think it useful to think about backwards compatibility for the purposes of feature adoption. I think for 2.0 versions and similar, we should think about this.  It is useful to have 3rd parties be able to read and use the spec, and it is important so that we “don’t break the web”, and ensure adoption, etc.

STA: Backwards compatibility is limiting and that means that an old file can continue to work, which is why I am more worried about forward compatibility or not giving an error when some changes are made. Maybe the safest solution is to never do 2.1. And maybe there are benefits to sticking with it for 15 years and maybe there will be a MF 3.0 WG. What are your thoughts on this possibility?

MIH: From the localization tooling perspective, from what I’ve seen, some of them are very slow to change, to the point that they consider it a lock-in that they don’t support open standards, which is a benefit to them. Stuff we add in the future will hopefully still exportable to XLIFF and supported by the tools. I understand the concern about forward compatibility, but I think going through XLIFF will mitigate that concern. I would still design things in a way that allows us to not to have to add things in the future. For example, I think we should be able to support formatting / markup elements now, rather than add it in the future. As far as what I mean by “formatting elements”, I don’t know what the difference is between that and what is meant by “markup elements”. What I mean by “formatting elements” is that it is something that helps you represent the concept that a certain range of text is bold, another range of text is a link, however that is done.

EAO: I think that if we write in the text about how compatibility should work with changes in the future, it shouldn’t be controversial. But who knows? I don’t think we need to dedicate time on this call to that.

[  ] AP Compatibility Strategy Plan to at least guarantee or not compatibility in future and th

EAO: It would be nice like what STA mentioned that we get a 2.0 version that never needs to be upgraded, but we also need to build in facilities to support how we deal with upgrades.

STA: My point was not that 2.0 would be so good that it never needs to changed, but at least have the strategy for how do we change it when it needs to be fixed, because it will have things that need fixing. Do we build into the standard a way to fix those mistakes, or is useful to just stick with the standard without changes to avoid breaking others? That was my question.

RCA: Stas already started here some discussion around compatibility https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/discussions/191 in Roadmap and created https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/222 to follow up on it.


## Resource-level data model

EAO: I don’t have anything strictly prepared for this, but we have use cases identified two weeks for things like “Click next to continue” when “next” is the contents of a nearby message. It would be good for MF to support message references, and as I said, also be able to support collections of messages, either in a group or in a resource. It plays into other work that we’re doing to provide a resource level syntax from the start and not just a message level syntax. I think this a topic that we have a number of different opinions in this group.  What is the reason for bringing this up today to discuss?

RCA: I brought this up in the chat that we had in which it was said it would be good to discuss in this meeting.

STA: My high-level thoughts about resources and single messages: We agreed that there are a lot of use cases that do not benefit from the abstraction of the Resource, and there are some that do. There are systems that do not have a way to support the Resource collection of messages.

We could standardize MF Spec to be a single message and on top of it build another spec for container messages , wondering if this container should be more environment specific than generalized in spec. 

For example, for ECMA-402, we could imagine the ECMA-402 container specific for web distribution, perhaps aligned with how CSS or XML works. And other environments could use their own containers custom to their environments.

So I wonder if it should be up to the MFWG to decide on what the container format should look like, rather than allowing it to be defined in the environment.

EAO: What we can do it’s define what the message model must look like and provide information about how the Resource Data Model should look like. 

We should make it clear that we should have other (ex: syntax) representations of messages from which you can build a data model without having resources.

**_**“We have some reserved characters in the proposal  - How do we feel others extending the actual syntax to provide additional syntax we won’t provide ? ”**_**

MIH: To clarify a little bit, in the proposal doc that I shared with CLDR-TC and MFWG, I am not too opinionated about the idiomaticity and syntax of the APIs created for different frameworks or languages.

I think we would be fine if different languages/frameworks fine tune syntax

EAO: Does anyone here care about the syntax?

RCA: For users, I think the syntax is important, and becomes more so every day. It gets reused in different languages, platforms, and environments. Having a common syntax would be helpful. Ignoring this and leaving it open for more specific situations is also important when a single syntax wouldn’t necessarily apply.

MIH: Syntax is important. We see already from current MessageFormat in ICU, for example doubling an apostrophe to escape it has been bad for translation.

Having a syntax that works across languages seems nice but I don’t think that seems practical. Not many C++ developers use JS, so forcing a C++ syntax on JS users would not be nice, and vice versa (a JSON-y syntax would not be nice for C++ developers).

EAO:  If we do consider that syntax is important our audience are developer and optimize the DX.  

Then I think we have 2 or 3 use cases that come to mind. How do you write a new message?  

1. Where maybe you write a message embedded by itself in another programming language. 

2. Work with message when they gets extracted by a separate process into an external resource file, and continue through a localization process. How do you work with that?

3. And the third action is that when you have a localized message, how does the workflow work around that. How would we change a message that has already been translated? Ex: post-editing.

These are the 3 drivers that I think determine about what goes into the syntax. Or do people have other concerns?

MIH: I would like to represent ZBI’s position, and since he’s not here, I will try to represent it myself. His idea is that translators should be able to edit files directly, without a tool, and therefore the format should be (at least somewhat) translator friendly. It is not my position, and I hope I represented his position accurately. But if we go that way then the result might be a bit less dev friendly.

EAO: I think yes, but that also providing a good syntax editing interface for developers will provide a sufficiently good interface for localisers as well.

RCA: I agree that we should have a common consensus when it comes to develop in a system where you have to use different types of translations / languages / syntax and would be really an advantage re-use the knowledge across platforms

MIH: One is about developers vs translators, but I would argue it the other way around. Something nice for translators will work for developers. But something that looks nice and friendly for a developer is not necessarily nice and friendly for a translator, but the other way around is less likely.

MIH: Updates are usually handle by location tools , normally this

EAO: Let’s not get into the details of discussing these, and we can have those discussions later.  Also, for ZBI’s position on syntax, see [GitHub issue #53](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/53).

RCA: Should we add this as a topic for upcoming sessions of the extended meetings?


## Junk in Data Model

RCA: ZBI is not here to discuss this.

MIH: Does anyone knows what this means, “Junk in the data model”?

EAO: You have a syntax representation of a message, and parsing mostly succeeds, but part of it is bad, so it fails. It is possible to represent with the bad parts of the message, along with the good parts. If you’re dealing with the bad message, the message is able to represent the bad parts, and the good parts. The “Junk” term comes from Fluent, which handles this. So the idea is to include in the MF spec a representation of the “Junk” as a pattern element.

RCA: I should learn more about how this works, but could you elaborate more about how it works?

EAO: So the difference here is that we have something that looks right at the data model, but what if parsing it into the data model fails, or what if formatting fails?

STA: This implies a recovery mechanism, so that we can continue further.

EAO: Yes, let’s say at the end of the message you never have the close curly brace of a serialized message string to close the open curly brace, what do you for the handling?

MIH: Even though this is an obviously recently formed opinion, I don’t see how this could be useful.

Example if I have : Hello 

I see some benefit to have some kind of junk information for refactoring work, so that I can fix it or change instead of throwing away messages that I fail. But for real runtime use, I don’t see how it is useful.  In general, I don’t think you can do good error recovery in a meaningful way.

EAO: To describe, this is also useful for all of the operations to perform on messages beyond parsing. Like passing them to translators, or convert the message source format to a different source format. Junk can also help inform the context of other parts of the message.

MIH: That’s maybe my bias as a user of more strongly-typed programming languages. I just don’t see anything useful to send out a message with junk to be translated into 80 languages.

EAO: To clarify, I was not saying this. THat is one possible thing that you can do through the data model, but the data model is not only there for data formatting.

MIH: To summarize my position, we shouldn't keep junk in the model, just my opinion.

EAO: Let’s revisit this when we have more than 5 minutes to consider, and we have ZBI around to clarify, too.

RCA: What is the plan for the next extended meeting?

EAO: Our next one is about Display/Markup Elements.
