### June 6th, meeting Attendees

- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Markus Scherer - Google (MWS)
- Zibi Braniecki - Mozilla (ZBI)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)

## Auto Transcription

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

May 23, 2022

### Agenda

- review open issues
- discuss blockers to beginning prototyping

## Review open issues

### [#254](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/254)

EAO: It looks like we have consensus that we should have the same number of keys and selectors.

MWS: I feel strongly that we should have matching numbers of keys and selectors.

### [#252](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/252)

EAO: I agree with STA that we should close this with a conclusion that local variable definitions and selectors should be different from each other.

### [#251](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/251)

EAO: I don't think we're all agreed either way on the resolution.

MWS: I think it is predicated on starting in code mode. If we do start in code mode, then we don't need to insert anything addition to start collecting patterns.

EAO: If we don't unify local variable definitions and selectors, then a single preamble doesn't make sense. We have two parts.

MWS: Yes, you have to have these parts separate and clear somehow. You have local variables, then followed by selectors, then followed by selector key and pattern pairs. But you don't need something extra special before you start having patterns.

STA: I think the preamble is an outdated concept, and we have 2 related issues, so I don't think we need a third. I think we can close this.

MWS: Yes, close this as moot.

STA: This issue is covered by #252 and #257.

### [#247](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/247)

EAO: I think there is some value to have function options that refer to arguments / variables.

MWS: I added my comment previous. I see that MIH has added a plausible use case. I'm not entirely happy with that, but I cannot think of a better way of supporting that use case, so I'm okay with that.

EAO: Maybe we can say "yes", but qualify it by saying that there should be restrictions on the functions in the registry.

MWS: Can we rephrase that as only allowing variables in function options. I would like to restrict it to the type of usage that MIH recorded in the issue so that we do not allow more free form usages.

EAO: That would restrict functions in the way that they can operate.

MWS:

MIH: Yes, we shouldn't allow variables / arguments

MWS: I think we are trying to define something that is not what this issue is about, but an addendum.

EAO: My proposal is to record consensus that the answer "yes, but allow restrictions in the function registry". There would be further discussion. But at the syntax level, I think we have agreement.

MWS: I agree at the syntax we can allow `{... :function option=$val ...}`, but we should not allow `$val` be an argument to the message.

MIH: Does that mean that we can use local variables?

MWS: I would like it to be limited to bullet 3 in the description of the issue: "Can `$variable` above be supplied by the application code as an argument to MessageFormat?"

STA: I think bullet 5 "Can `$variable` refer to a local variable defined by the message?" to be considered as well. This would allow alignment / agreement across parts of a translation.

MIH: I think bullet 4 would allow sentence grammatical agreement.

STA: MIH, I thought in our previous conversations, you said that a placeholder would be sufficient to allow this.

MWS: In my mind, I think this is pretty speculative. I am doubtful that we can have a single pass that would allow sentence agreement. I think we would need at least a second pass handling to support sentence agreement. I think the scenario MIH gave to support agreement of units of measurement as compelling, but I have not found other arguments convincing.

ZBI: I generally agree with MWS. My mental model over the last few months have been updated, in which we are not going to have a message format that handles grammatical agreement itself, but it can be the input to a separate system that is like a grammatical correctness engine. Instead, we can have a simpler model where simpler grammatical agreement can be supported but defer to a separate engine for more complex work. So I support bullet 3 and bullet 5.

STA: To clarify, I think bullets 4 and 5 are equivalent. But I think we need to first decide whether we can pass info of one part of a message to another part.

MIH: I agree with STA that bullets 4 and 5 are part of the same solution. I also agree with ZBI that we should have a grammatical correctness engine as a separate step outside of MessageFormat. If you have a sentence _"I couldn’t fit the statue in the bag because it was too big"_ vs _“I couldn’t fit the statue in the bag because it was too small”_, you need to have metadata to know to which noun the adjectives "big" / “small” refers to. Although the sentences are almost identical, “big” refers to the statue, “small” refers to the bag. A machine can’t decide that (yet :-)

MWS: I am willing to stand down on this, and we can stick with "Yes, with potential restrictions defined in the function registry".

STA: I agree with this consensus. I would still be happy to document the usages that I have in mind.

### [#281](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/281)

RCA: We have 2 approvals. Are we okay to merge?

MIH: Yes.

### [#280](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/280)

EAO: This effectively removes the ability to have a space after a colon but before the name of a function.

### [#278](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/278)

RCA: I think BAT needed to change the examples.

### [#276](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/276)

EAO: My understanding here is that MIH thinks that double quotes are better than parentheses.

MIH: I am fine with parentheses for literal values. I feel stronger about angle brackets, which would cause problems with HTML-style markup languages.

### [#273](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/273)

EAO: I feel differently about this PR after discussions about how to address open / close elements, and would rather spend time on that discussion instead of this PR.

MIH: Yes, I think open / close / standalone for placeholders together as one topic and not different topics.

## Discuss blockers to beginning prototyping

RCA: Shall we talk about ECH's proposed topic about how to go about prototyping?

MIH: Yes, with the understanding that we are not trying to force anything, but it is already summer, and different people will have vacation, and we have to have a prototype implemented by middle of August to have something ready for a technical preview for ICU 72.

EAO: Yes, let's talk about this. A relevant question is to MWS - do you have an idea of what needs to be resolved before we begin on work?

MIH: My intuition is that we have to resolve all the issues labeled "blocker", otherwise we are stuck. Either they are blockers, or they are labeled incorrect.

EAO: But are there some things that might be minor, like the character for delimiting literal values, and they can be changed later easily.

MIH: I agree that such things can be changed later, but the point is whether it is okay that we go ahead and implement things in a certain way that aren't agreed upon yet, with the clear understanding that things will change.

EAO: The point of the original consensus syntax would be that this would be the starting point from which any implementations

ECH: The point of this question is to make sure that we're thinking about the timeline, and that we have a backup plan. **\_**

STA: I think we have general agreement on the data model, thanks to this exercise with the syntax. I think these discussions, even if they result in not immediately pursuing certain options, are important milestones for helping us understand the issues. Things like: separating local variable definitions from selectors; fairly good idea of what a placeholder will look like (barring markup, which is TBD); number of variant keys. Outstanding: local variables.

And I want to say it because no one else is, that there is no way that we are going to meet the mid-August feature freeze deadline.

MWS: I think the biggest thing that would cause us to change is "do we start in code mode?", followed by whether we delimit things and how.

RCA: Who will be implementing this?

MIH: I will, for ICU4J.

EAO: And I will, for ECMA-402.

My question is also what do we

RCA: MIH, with these blocker issues, do we have the necessary hints and directions to guide impleme notation? With the understanding that our continued discussions can update the implementation?

MIH: I appreciate EAO's offer to work on the JavaScript implementation, because that is a totally different type of language. The real deadline is for ICU. I think we should identify 1 or 2 big issues, like what MWS said. To what STA said about just supporting the data model first, and my response is that I already went through that exercise 1 year ago with EAO when going back and forth to show that discussed features were supportable. It was awkward to show and write unit tests for, so I think also having a syntax will make that much clearer.

MWS (from chat): for "normal people" to give feedback, they have to see & play with a message-string-with-syntax and see what happens

EAO: I think the difficult stuff for the internals is how to deal with values and variables, as defined. How do we handle markup elements, are they fundamentally their own thing, or can they work within placeholders? The syntax level questions are things that for a technical preview could be handled more easily because we have EBNF parser tool that can help.

MIH: My gut feeling about the "big blockers":

- start in code or text
- markup elements: same as placeholder, or not?
- the "." in variable names (`{$foo.bar :func}` or `{$foo :func opt=$bar.baz}` or even in selectors / local variables

The second and third feel more like data model than syntax, really, so they should be addressed first.

STA: So I like the list by MIH. I would add use cases for local variables naming. Let's use the guidance from the CLDR-TC on this topic, which said to allow "." in identifiers that are treated in implementation-specific ways.

MIH: I'm okay with that, even though it contradicts other things that CLDR-TC said. If I reference `$foo.bar`, and the `.bar` implies some type of structure must exist in `$foo` for the engine to work properly, then I think

MWS (from chat): Variable name with dot: I certainly don't want the spec to require that something special happens. But if in some implementation or language something natural could happen, that's probably ok.

STA: MIH, what you said is not how I understood the CLDR-TC guidance. I understood it to mean that if an implementation uses a "." dot, then it is not a part of the data model, and it is entirely between the specific implementation and users of it.

MIH: My hope is that, whatever we implement, if we swap implementations, we get the same results. The custom functions should look more or less the same. If we don't have that property, then we can't have a test suite to verify conformance.

MWS: I don't want the spec to require that `person.name` should have some fancy look. It should be given a map where one of the keys is literally `person.name` as a string key and be able to get something out. It should also be possible for an implementation to later say that, if `person.name` as a string key is not present, but `person` does exist, then it does a lookup into the `person` struct if appropriate. I just don't want to _require_ in the spec that a 2-step lookup should happen.

MIH (via chat):

Example:

```
mf = mf2.parse(
  "{$pers.name} was born on {$pers.dob}")
```

should I be able to do this?
`mf.format( "pers" : currentPErson)`
?

Or I am forced to do

```
mf.format( {
     "pers.name" : currentPerson.name,
     "pers.dob" : currentPerson.dob
)
```

MWS (via chat): Mihai's example could be implemented with a simple Map<String, Object> given to the MF2 function with `{"pers.name":"Markus", "pers.dob":(1905-12-31)}`

MIH (via chat): yes, but the dev is forced to convert a POJO to a map in order to use it

MWS (via chat): it should also be possible to provide a "pers" argument with some structure (e.g., another Map, or some special type with a get(name) etc.)

MIH: I get that But I do see value in the specification saying what the expected behavior should be.

STA: I don't think it is even possible to do what MIH is asking for.

MIH: I disagree. I think you can look at the type of `pers` as a Person object and then do something accordingly. Or you can do something like we do for DateFormatter.

STA: I don't understand what we did for DateFormatter.

MIH: Okay, if we can't decide, then I'm fine just saying that it is 100% an implementation detail.

EAO: I would like to stick to the CLDR-TC + ICU-TC committee's consensus decisions, otherwise we will set ourselves back several months.

The other part I would like to discuss is how to handle variables, which is related. The question is what can a function see? The key part here is what do we understand a "value" to be? I understand that the CLDR+ICU-TC believes that when a value is given to the formatting function, only the value is given, but not the name or identifier that the value is associated with.

MWS: I agree with EAO with what the value is. If I think of this is as a Java implementation, the name should be opaque and all you get is a Java object. We would want the formatting functions to be able to inspect the runtime type and dispatch as necessary.

EAO: One extension point of this discussion is do we take the same approach for function names?

MWS: I would like to clarify that the message formatting function should know what a `Person` type is. It shouldn't know what types that the formatting function expects to handle. The message library could generically handle that a Person object maps to a Map. We don't need to require it, but we don't need to forbid it.

Regarding dots in a function name versus a variable name. In a variable name, it is natural to allow the dots to signify a multi-level lookup. For functions, one thing that Addison liked was that dots could signify a custom function name, where the dots signify a namespace in the style of Java package names / Maven artifact group ids. Back to variables, we should still allow a flat level lookup.

MIH: I am fine to say that this topic is just an implementation detail, and I will go ahead and implement in the ICU4J prototype whatever I think makes the most sense for Java.

EAO: It does sound like the function name is a separate discussion. One thing I do like for custom functions is some signifier that indicates that a function is a custom function. In Fluent, a leading dash indicates that a message is a term, and in a similar way, maybe a "." could be used to indicate a custom function.

ECH (via chat): +1. MWS's PR mentions this point exactly -- that a dot in a function could signify a custom function, without specifying how. This is where Addison +1'ed this alternative over the other alternatives for signifying that a function is a custom function

EAO: So should we update the EBNF to indicate that dots in function names imply custom functions?

MWS: I don't think we need to update the syntax. I think we can let it just be a convention that we handle in a specific way accordingly.

RCA: Let's record consensus on these topics.

STA: We haven't answered ECH's questions about backup plans.

EAO: I might be available for June 27, but would be out for most of July.

STA: I would be out for 2 weeks in July... so what is our backup plan?

ECH: We have the 3 items above listed by MIH. We've already discussed the 3rd item and reached a consensus, as the notes above indicate. If we focus on the remaining 2 items of that list, then we can have the resolutions we need to unblock MIH's ICU4J tech preview implementation.

EAO: Given this time crunch, we should identify who will submit PRs to improving the existing syntax spec according to the decisions that we are making? Specifically, who other than STA and myself will submit PRs to change the EBNF structure? That needs to be happening in parallel for us to be reaching these goals.

STA: I can definitely can work on the EBNF. For the decision mentioned of separating local variables from selectors, this is a topic that is tightly coupled with other issues, such as whether and how we delimit selectors. They are all regarding syntax visuals, and maybe we should handle them altogether this time around. As long as we reach some sort of agreement, I can go ahead the EBNF.

EAO: I think STA and I can coordinate on that.

EAO: As a last sort of question, as a starting point for next week, I still think we should start in text mode. I know that MIH and STA and MWS think we should start in code mode. Is there anyone else besides me who thinks we should start in text mode?

ECH: I agree to start in code mode.

RGN: I have a weak preference to start in code mode.

### the "." in variable names (`{$foo.bar :func}` or `{$foo :func opt=$bar.baz}` or even in selectors / local variables

#### Consensus :

Next Meeting Agenda :

- start in code or text - https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/256 - Look at meeting notes
- markup elements: same as placeholder, or not?
- the "." in variable names (`{$foo.bar :func}` or `{$foo :func opt=$bar.baz}` or even in selectors / local variables - Already discussed we need to record consensus
