Attendees:
Please fill in a 3-letter acronym if this is your first meeting:

- Suggestion 1: First letter of given name, First letter of surname, Last letter of surname
- Suggestion 2: First initial, middle initial, last initial
- Suggestion 3: Custom

### October 24th, meeting Attendees

- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

### Agenda

Prepare for the tech preview release
Open PRs
Open issues
Do deliverables include function registry?
Next steps / Roadmap

## Prepare for the tech preview release

ECH: 4 Pull Requests and a [blog post](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1AjCDEMqfc7kvR1OH_7zaFd7YLPDgJidBvY3Whx9nrD0/edit).

EAO:
Add Feedback discussion category link to issue template selector
Move earlier spec.md to experiments branch
Update README with examples and links to feedback collection

STA: Let’s also triage and address open PRs.

MIH: +1

STA: Let’s also review the idea of changing “2.0” to “2” in the name “MessageFormat 2.0” in our messaging, repo, etc.

MIH: "2" for the project / effort, and "2.0" for the version.

EAO: Other specs use different naming schemes (semantic versioning, dates / years, auto-increment integers, etc.). The draft spec is okay with “DRAFT … 2.0” for now, we can revisit.

RCA: We should revisit this as people look at the repo.

## Open PRs

### Add variable resolution [#305](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/305)

STA: From the point of view of announcing the Tech Preview, leaving this PR open for now is fine.

MIH: I did approve this earlier today, but based on earlier discussion, it might be weird to them if we change the spec when they visit. So how do we move forward without confusing people?

EAO: This is why I want to have a `main` for the version of the spec, and using branches to clarify the versions of the spec. We can use the features of git like git tags in our repo to refer to

MIH: But the links to ICU are gone.

EAO: We can use git tags.

STA: We can use Github Releases to create a version.

ECH: Github Releases create git tags. Will updating the spec on `main` create confusion to users?

RCA: Yes, it will. We should have some type of tags / snapshots / releases, and all other changes are labeled somehow as draft.

STA: I’m not too worried about ICU contains the link to our repo’s `main` branch, since the ICU 72 implementation is labeled as Tech Preview. And `main` will always be the most current. How do we avoid bike shedding on the name of the version for the release?

EAO: What about 2.0.0-draft.1?

STA: Does semver even apply here? If we just say “-vICU72”, then it is very clear what the release corresponds to.

EAO: Let’s investigate and get back to this later.

ECH: Then do we hold off on merging PRs until then, because that is where this discussion started?

EAO: I’m against blocking progress our work because we don’t have a name of the version.

MIH: Nobody is suggesting that we stop working because of the name of the version.

EAO: https://www.unicode.org/reports/about-reports.html#Versioning

ECH: We all agree to revisit the idea of releases and version naming so that we make things clearer for users in the future.

STA: I would like to have a single version for all of the constituent parts of the spec (syntax, formatting) rather than separate versions per constituent part. I agree with ECH’s suggestion to use auto-increment integers.

EAO: This relates to the question of “Do deliverables include the function registry?”

STA: Some kinds of PRs that don’t touch the spec can be handled with a quicker turnaround without waiting for the plenary meetings. Maybe the Chair Group can handle that, or maybe 1 or 2 asynchronous proposals without needing to meet.

EAO: The OpenJS Cross-project Council handles [this sort of need specifically](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/455efe54f19a93d785a70d9cc9e88a9600c4ffd2/governance/GOVERNANCE.md#fast-tracking-prs).

ECH: +1

MIH: This does not apply to changes to the spec, right?

ECH: That’s right.

EAO: Let’s follow, and even incorporate into our rules, the Fast Tracking PRs guidelines from the link above.

ECH: This sounds good.

## Open issues

When do we evaluate the local variables? #299

## Do deliverables include the function registry?

## Next steps / Roadmap

RCA: I know someone who wants to sponsor the implementation in ICU4C because it will help the ecosystem that they depend on.

STA: How much are they willing to handle changes?

RCA: I wanted to see the level of interest of working on this.

MIH: The problem with ICU is that things in ICU4J or ICU4C are implemented together, so they certain non-idiomatic quirks.

ECH:

RCA: The things that they already asked about the comments (?), the list of custom formatters, how custom formats will work, how resources will work. Comments refer to the metadata for the message at the various levels of the message (message-level, placeholder-level). Resources refer to files or bundles of messages.

EAO: The repo for resources is at https://github.com/eemeli/message-resource-wg/. My answer to RCA’s original question is that there is no need for an implementation to not start working. It is great to have comments and questions from the outside.

RCA: Taking into account that ICU4C would be a port from the ICU4J version.

EAO: Would it be a straight port? ICU4J is using

MIH: I intend to rewrite the generated parser part and rewrite it by hand.

RCA: During the next meeting, it would be nice to walk through the roadmap list that STA had created for the next iteration of MFWG.

EAO: I think that too is predicated on what is part of the release. We have an open discussion of whether the exact contents / implementation of the function registry, and not just the shape / interface(s), are part of the release.

MIH: We have to decide what exactly the official release is, to discuss.

ECH: It sounds like we are all in agreement, in different words.

MIH: I will send out the agenda email for next week?

EAO: What is the rotation schedule after next Mihai?

Meeting notes doc for next week (2022-10-31 Intl.MessageFormat WG):
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oW4dIi6JZMxavLB19gMhWW-yTEV3gd6fJutJHo78NPk/edit
