### Transcription

- https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zKmJie3RL4tK2Za2QT5kYOqnwjSSY-XSLYNB_xdDO1Y/edit
- https://docs.google.com/document/d/1fTqan70R_0TA1BOwMdRsMOElRgLV0hR22t7AnByQfCk/edit

### January 31, meeting Attendees

- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- Daniel Minor - Mozilla (DLM)
- Matjaž Horvat - Mozilla (MAT)
- David Filip - XLIFF TC, Huawei (DAF)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Matjaž Horvat - Mozilla (MAT)
- Erik Nordin - Mozilla (ETN)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Daniel Minor - Mozilla (DLM)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Batjargal Batbold (BAT) (**\* check if acronym not already claimed \*\***)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Zibi Braniecki - Amazon (ZBI)
- Luke Swartz - Google (LHS)
- Shane Carr - Google (SFC)
- George Rhoten - Apple (GWR)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

## Next Meeting

Feb 21, 2022

### Moderator : Rômulo Cintra

### Agenda

- Working Group Progress Status -(CLDR -TC proposal(s) evaluation)
- #214 Runtime behaviour (Document it’s a follow up of Message pattern elements #212 - Design Doc. presentation )
- Case Selection - Design Document #208 - Review/Feedback and vote to decide among considered alternative

## Working Group Progress Status - (CLDR-TC proposal(s) evaluation)

RCA: Does anyone have anything to say about the email above that was sent to the group?

MIH: My reading of the email is that if there are two, three, or however many proposals, that we present all of them to the CLDR-TC.

RCA: They mentioned about start aligning to an ICU preview, so there should be more than a spec, no?

GWR: I still work in ICU. Personally, I don’t think that any external dependencies are available in ICU. ICU only supports Java and C++. Or maybe ICU4X, whatever that programming language it uses. So this technology preview current implementations are incompatible with whatever is in ICU because they need JSON parsers or ECMAScript, etc. So something separate from ICU might be possible, and I think that should be made aware to the people receiving the proposals.

EAO: I don’t think I’m not sure what the benefit of talking about this now.

STA: Do you know who will be making the decision after this meeting?

ZBI: I can answer. We are. CLDR will provide feedback. They may include strongly worded warnings about what won’t be compatible with existing work. It may be strongly worded recommendations of what should be included. I think that’s a fairly optimistic

ECH: +1 to what EAO said.

MIH: They don’t expect us to unify the documents / proposals before sending them to the committees.

ZBI: Right, we send what we have, and then we synthesize a design based on their feedback.

EAO: Let’s have 10 mins each for each proposal.

RCA: Please use [this form](https://forms.gle/fmB1BAL8edgBaDnQA) to submit feedback to the Unicode Consortium about your participation in this group.

### Stas proposal

[link to slide deck](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1VHz4rjoX8OGz8dHTchuEzVVt1rrDMov3FMyLgO5PsTY/edit?usp=sharing)

STA: If you’re heard me before, you know I talk about simplicity. I’ve homed in on 3 principles – compatibility, embeddability, and predictability. Compatibility – I would like vendors and workflows to adapt to the new standard. Embeddability – it should be low-level and agnostic to how and where they’re defined and stored. Predictability – the syntax should be simple for non-technical translators, although I don’t know if all of the syntax should be simple since we expect them to be using GUI CAT tools.

The goal is to define the lower bound of complexity. I feel like whatever we add on top of this should be scrutinized for whether we need it, and if we can achieve it in other ways, we should lean towards excluding it.

Focus on the message, not the container format. A consequence of that is that there are no built-in message references. I know we agreed to it, but I think it’s possible to allow all of the previous use cases without them.

I think there should be a dedicated type for a variable.

If you don’t have selectors in the message data models for a message is still the same, have always a variants map being same that message don’t have selectors, this allows to go from a single pattern message in search language like English to a multivariant message in target languages.

No nesting of patterns or expressions, so you can’t call a function after another. But there are let-bindings (“alises”) that allow indirections. Also, aliases to sub-messages (“phrases”).

Syntax – whitespace insignificant, designed to avoid double and single quotes as much as possible. It is reminiscent of MessageFormat v1, which is intentional. No point in reinventing the wheel.

I use square brackets to delimit translatable content. The functional call syntax puts the argument first and the function second. An underscore is used for the default (“catch-all”) variant key.

Functions can have multiple signatures. So this one accepts either article, plural and case options, or article and accord. This is still WIP. signatures can be local specific. So these two are English specific. But for example, Polish expects many more. Grammatical cases and doesn't have articles. So we will have a completely different set of params defined in the registry.

With custom functions, we can do a lot of things. Query the environment of the user. We can implement message references. And there are drawbacks to doing that through functions. It’s okay to leave this all to user-land. For UI elements, ZBI and EAO have been toying with markup, but I have left them to custom functions. I haven’t thought about what kind of metadata we can store. But maybe we can leave that to custom functions.

Blind spots: interoperability with XLIFF, doc comments, metadata. Need feedback: escaping (message or container?), doc comments, aliases to sub-messages.

### EZ proposal

[link to slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Tzz5gBH8t-xXTH8UXaC6f7-4v_--2mJhTlcYOoVaSHA/edit#slide=id.p)

EAO:

Contents: syntax, data model, formatting behavior, message selection, EBNF, DOM localization proposal.

Missing pieces: function registry, XLIFF 2 Module, test suite. Also, doesn’t include a converter from MF1 messages to new MF2 messages, and any “unknown-unknown”s.

Syntax is a little flipped from Stas model in regards to use of square brackets. The syntax is meant to allow single line messages to incorporate all parts of the message and be embedded. An asterisk is used in select messages for selector variables. Markup tags are parsed into separate elements in the model, but when they are merged into the target document, they will be formatted according to that format of the target document.

### EM proposal

[link to design doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kqD0gy5x1mfiF2PAegjcNCAc98snTAqtbxccxfLcpNo/edit#heading=h.1bnew4gwuonh)

MIH: I can provide a link to the design document, which is a long document. But I don’t have any presentation made beforehand. The meeting agenda ahead of time did not specify that we would be discussing the 3 proposals. I will try my best.

LHS: MIH, can you touch on the points of your proposal that differ from the previous 2 proposals?

MIH: Well, I will skip the syntax discussion because I think that is the least important. There is some background information for the benefit of the CLDR-TC because they haven’t been involved in discussions like we have.

One difference between this and STA’s model is about simple messages. Although that could be a minor difference, and I will need to think about it more.

I don’t know what concepts are new to this group.

RCA: Maybe you could jump to the points that differ?

MIH: There are notions of open/close/standalone placeholders. But this is not just for HTML, it could also work for text-to-speech uses. This notion of open/close/standalone has been used in XLIFF for a long time, and has been used successfully for all other kinds other prevalent file formats like MS Word, Powerpoint, Photoshop, InDesign, etc.

Another difference that it’s not highlighted it’s how to deal with Case Selection, This is one of the biggest questions , should we use 1st match or best match ?

I have a position regarding this, and it’s to do as ICU does, using the best match. Also i have “macros” that I think in the other proposals they introduce something similar called “alias”. Both are similar concepts that are defined and can be used in the message itself. I can compare it as Local vs Global variables. They can be used for the situation of combinatorial explosion of variants for selection messages that have multiple selector arguments.

In the very beginning we decided to do message full level and for specific combinatorial “explosions” we use this references to pieces of message being part of same message , they are locally defined.

Translation metadata also can include comments for translators. Any relevant data that can be included in the message. I don’t already have a way to add it to the message itself just because it can be too much content and might become difficult to read. But it can be placed alongside the message.

But yeah, the core differences are the manner of case selection in a selection message.

RCA: Thanks for presenting that without prior notice.

### Discussion / feedback

RCA: Perhaps we can allocate 10 minutes to discuss the 3 proposals?

EAO: There is so much to discuss that I don’t think 10 minutes does the topic justice. Also, can we increase the frequency of meeting so that we meet every week, given the amount of information to discuss?

RCA: Let’s continue with the 10 minutes for discussion, we can adjust the time to 20 minutes if we need it, but we should also make sure we have time to discuss the other items of the agenda – runtime behavior and case selection.

EAO: Maybe we can identify topics to take up

STA : Function registry it’s one of the topics we should focus , understand the expectation , who has access to date , where date lives
[ ] AP : Function registry i

MIH: I imagine the registry is something hosted by Unicode and would follow the Unicode processes to —-.

GWR: Function registry I feel also a good discussion for later time , STA proposal it’s aligned with our vision . + STA proposal

EAO: In addition to the general discussion on aliases and macros, the one difference between the proposals, my has aliases disallow translatable content.
[ ] AP : Macros vs “Alias”

ECH: It’s been a while since I’ve taken a look at proposals until recently. I’m sure there’s been work on them as well. Syntax aside, what are the main differences between the STA and EM proposal? We don’t have a whole lot of time, but I’d like to hear your answer, because it seems to me that they’ve converged quite a bit.

STA: I think they’re actually quite close. There are a few differences, for example variables being a built-in type. Messages always being a map rather than a single pattern. I had a good conversation with MIH about case selection. But I went with the “first wins” selection strategy, which allows for predictability / determinism. I generally think that they are very close. I even hesitated whether or not I should present mine or not.

EAO: One aspect you can cover at some point is how to handle display or mock-up elements that separate from \_ that have a start and end tag. In STA they more fuzzily have a start and an end. From what I understand in the EM proposal, they need a placeholder for a start and an end. We ought to start considering the need for such a thing.

MAT: This might have been covered at previous meetings. STA, I liked that you called compatibility with existing l10n workflows as a design principle. I think this is an important point. To what extent do we want the new proposal to be usable out of the box in popular platforms.
[ ] AP: Retro compatibility related issue https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/88#issuecomment-1024344193

ZBI: My understanding is that everyone agrees in principle. The moment when things become interesting and our experience comes to bear is with tradeoffs and balances. Whatever the extreme for compatibility that we have to pay to obtain compatibility, we’re still negotiating it.

It seems to me that what the STA proposal is emphasizing is that he is nudging us in the direction of stronger compatibility. The balance I heard from his presentation is that as long as there is a parser that can convert from MF2.0 to legacy formats, then we should be expecting the legacy formats to adopt our data model, but not introduce changes to workflow patterns.

STA: Related to what MAT asked, we should add a separate meeting about XLIFF compatibility. Because this is how we get to compatibility with localization tooling. The one topic that I wished we had discussed more before my proposal is comments, because XLIFF has a notion of notes. I wonder how that should map to our data model.

Topics that we have noted for further discussion:

- Message references vs. aliases to message fragments
- Aliases / macros to expressions
- XLIFF compat
- Function registry
- Case selection
- UI Elements
- Metadata and comments
- Container format

RCA: Right, this is a good summary, that also includes the action points (AP) noted above.

STA: My secret hope is that we can have two specs. One for the message body and the other for the container of messages.

ZBI: Can you clarify if that also means you’re comfortable with double parsing — the problem I remember we were discussing earlier is writing by hand a system with two syntaxes which means you have to keep track of invariants in your head that you’re not breaking either way it’s encoded. And you’re comfortable with that cost?=

STA: I guess so, yes. I would expect that the containers formats would not be edited by hand.

ZBI: What’s your position on W3C for defining a format for MessageFormat 2.

STA: I don’t know what that is.

ZBI: If we want to propose MF2.0 for HTML and DOM L10n, we need to have a resource format.

STA: Ideally I think the container format would then be compatible with the message syntax.

ZBI: So W3C syntax you would propose to be separate from ICU syntax.

STA: Yes, but compatible, if possible. It’s hard to know if it’s going to be compatible, but that’s my hope.

EAO: How many topics have we identified to discuss right now?

RCA: It looks like eight.

EAO: So are we going to spend the next 8 months discussing these topics? Or do we have a timeline for talking about them?

RCA: As discussed before, you can continue talking about them offline and come prepared before meetings. But you also have to make sure that you keep the group informed and not leave them out, as well. Is that okay with you?

EAO: So are you saying that we shouldn’t talk about these more frequently?

RCA: I didn’t say that.

EAO: So can we discuss weekly?

MIH: I am fine to discuss weekly or more frequently. Maybe we can have separate meetings that are each focused on an individual topic.

RCA: Any objections? Should we have the meetings separate from the plenary group?

EAO: We get stuck discussing things all the time. I would like to propose that we have meetings where the participants get to decide preliminarily on what we discuss on a topic that is decided upon ahead of time, and if there is a disagreement during the discussion, only then do we go back on it. But if we just have discussions without planning, that’s going to lead to 8 months of us discussing and deciding nothing. I would like to make decisions before the meeting.

MIH: I would be happy for that to happen, but I don’t see how that will happen. Imagine that we spend 2 hours and we don’t agree, then what happens?

EAO: Let’s say if we spend two hours in a meeting and we do agree, then we can say we have a consensus on a decision.

MIH: That’s the easy case.

RCA: Historically, this has happened several times before, and we are in the same position as we were 2 years ago. During that time, I proposed having meetings between EAO and MIH and STA to unblock the sticking points. The points of all of all the task force meetings and other separate meetings was to bring decisions pre-cooked, and give people at the plenary the ability to decide on the final take. If it helps, let’s do it. MIH and others, are you okay to have these extra meetings?

ECH: We started this meeting talking about proposals and getting feedback with strongly worded X, Y or Z. How would that affect decision making?

ZBI: I cannot imagine us not taking that advice. We don’t need to formally claim that we will follow everything they say, but I imagine that we will follow all of it, frankly. I imagine we may come back and say that we really tried to conform and on this one subject we diverge, but ultimately, the president of unicode is telling us something.

ECH: I always thought that we needed to get conversation back to technical discussions, and today is a good example of that, and it’s great. This is a different way of making forward progress. I felt a bit disappointed that some of the things we were trying these out-of-band efforts, that there’s some way we will be able to make progress. I don’t want to think of it in terms of, “oh they’re telling us what to do” but if we could at least make progress together, that would be nice.

ZBI: I don’t think they’re telling us what to do. They’re telling us what they see. To me, that’s much more valuable.

ECH: Okay, I think that’s good.

EAO: Can I ask someone from the Chair Group for a meeting next Monday.

## [#214](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/214) Runtime behaviour

(Document is a follow up of [Message pattern elements #212](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/212) - [Design Doc. presentation](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1f9He3gTjKp0vrg7XMfTfm1t68lfIruWcboGs2H4Szo4/edit) )

EAO: To start off, we have various goals for matching data types with output formats. Goal 3 is about expressing input data in one of N data types, each with one or more formatters. Goal 6 is enable creating different implementations of the standard, which results in M different output types. So we get M x N combinations of message types. Previously, we only had outputs as a string type, so M = 1.

So we wrap each data type with a class that includes the value, formatting options, locale, etc.
For example, for a date input, the formatter resolves to a MessageDateTime instance. And to format that instance, call its toString() or toParts() method.
The new MF spec should not define all possible output formats. Concated string output is not special, though likely common. Errors should be implementation-defined, but fallback values ought to be well specified. Need a goldilocks solution for missing / bad data – enough to produce output, but not enough to compromise privacy or security. Specifying how the fallback works will help ensure compatibility between implementations.

MIH: We’ve touched on this in previous discussions before. I didn’t see the benefit of wrapping values, and I still don’t see the need now after this presentation. The placeholders have all this information already. If it is not a part of the spec and it’s not required, why should we even talk about it?

EAO : I supposed that runtime behavior should be part of spec the idea was to propose a large of test suite and examples to represent it.
The intent here is to find a way of presenting how the formatting ought to happen. Are you saying that you have a simpler way for formatting that covers all of the use cases that we presented?

MIH : I would like a description of the runtime as a Blackbox , where it’s visible from outside if I do I have to call .format() with arguments, or do I have to call a .resolve() that gives me a thing on which I then call .format() on?

EAO: Spec answers this concerns, I would also be happy to review the same on your spec and comment about it

STA: My understanding is that EAO said that this shouldn’t be specified, but I see a lot of value in discussing it. If we want this behavior, we should at least make sure that it’s possible that we can achieve this behavior. But I agree in general that this should be left for implementations to handle. I have a question and a thought. The question: is this specifically about formatting, but runtime behavior also includes matching/selection.

EAO: The design doc also includes matching, but I elided that due to time constraints.

STA: Maybe we should do a thought experiment. If we had a message and some inputs, what should the output be? And this ties into error handling. For example, if you have multiple selectors, and one of them fails, how do you handle that?
Maybe we don’t need to describe the exact manner of how implementations deal with what is in and what is out, but we could specify what is lazy and what is eager. When it comes to aspects like grammatical case like vocative or accusative, we might need this information available. So we should discuss what is evaluated lazily and what is evaluated eagerly.

ZBI: I agree with STA about what is lazy versus what is eager. All previous l10n system and mental models were about eager. What is interesting is to think about resolutions at runtime versus ahead of time. Also, error fallbacking and error recovery will vastly differ based on how much due diligence we do. There will be a cascade of fallbacking and error recovery that determines what the user can do. We cannot do UI messages if we can’t describe how errors are handled. I am not worried about over-specifying.
I want to respond to MIH who asked whether it was necessary to introduce an element, or if it is an optimization. I think it is an optimization, so I agree with your mental model. We can have a discussion about whether the pros outweigh the cons.

MIH: ZBI already addressed partially what I wanted to say. One thing is that you mention lazy / eager, and your programming backgrounds are different from mine. So I can’t readily see the benefit, and therefore these discussions are what we have to have. It doesn’t help to only read a design doc because it may still not be clear, so I would appreciate answers when I ask things because I genuinely want to understand.

EAO: I have a hard time understanding how to answer because I have written a design doc and presented it and has an implementation. Some things are specified in the runtime behavior that will not appear in the spec. I will read your document and I appreciate you reading mine.

STA: I don’t know about MIH and EAO, but I felt that this exercise of writing down a full attempt of a spec was enlightening. It showed me what parts I am confident about and what I’m not. It’s a bit of an exploration. From my side, I’m intrigued by the different runtime behaviors. One thing I would like to discuss next time is being able to say that a `{color}` accords with an `{item}`. How do we know whether `{item}` has a grammatical accusative case or not?

RCA: Okay, we can start wrapping up. I will send an invitation for the meeting next week. Last comments?

EAO: If someone else can think of the meetings for 2 weeks from now and 3 weeks from now, that would be nice.

RCA: Maybe people attending the next meeting can propose the topics for the following meeting(s). We also have the topic about case selection, for which we have a document, which we didn’t discuss.
Also, does anyone know when CLDR-TC will discuss the proposals?

ZBI: They are already reviewing the documents we submitted, and they will add comments asynchronously, and will be ready with feedback after a few weeks. But they won’t be presenting their comments at our meeting, for example.

## Conclusions/Next Steps

- Increase cadence of meetings having one MF meeting weekly to devote time to discuss #219 - starting next week
