### September 19th, meeting Attendees

- Romulo Cintra (RCA) Igalia
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Mihai Nita - Google (MIH)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)

## MessageFormat Working Group Contacts:

- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/message-format-wg)

### Agenda

Intro to Message resource WG.
Registry Definition Language
Tech Preview Status and feedback
Test Suite

## Past meeting Actions

## Implementation Status

## Review PR's & Open Issues

## Registry Definition Language

EAO: STA, is this something that you could come up with based on your previous work?

STA: What I worked on in XML might be interesting for MIH and ECH to take a look at.

MIH: We have something in our EM proposal, and I think what we had looks pretty similar.

STA: Yes. The version you created was JSON-based, and I only chose XML because it allowed me to think in terms of an XML schema.

I care more about the data that is defined. One thing that I explored was having different signatures for functions, and one of the signatures could be called based on the input provided.

How do we talk about this in a structured manner?

EAO: Can you review what you have and come back in a couple of weeks with a presentation.

STA: I can do that, although I need to consider the work from the other proposals.

MIH: We still need to resolve quite a few issues regarding the MessageFormat itself, like markdown, naming, etc.

STA: What I am hearing is that the registry work is not top priority right now because there is ongoing implementation work. But I can still do a comparison of the proposals for a registry and have that ready in a month. We can either take up the issue in a month, or later if we need to.

ECH: Back to STA’s idea, can we continue a weekly cadence of meetings, but have them shorter, and not as extended meetings but as a touch point for people working on implementations to resolve the existing blocking issues.

MIH: Yes, and can we use the Github issue labels “blocking” and “blocker-candidate” to label and triage the issues in the meetings?

EAO: I agree with a shorter weekly series of meetings for this.

## Message resource WG

EAO: I am trying to get an official CLDR working group to discuss message resources. I am proposing that we have a separate repo for this so that it can be separate from the MFWG repo.

MIH: Yes, I think this is better kept separate because it would distract from the MFWG communications if the resource format issues were in the same MFWG repo.

ECH: My concern is that a separate group on an issue might relitigate an issue that we already have a consensus on in a different way from our consensus. That is just based on what I’ve observed in the past, so it would be safer to have such a message resource group within MFWG.

RCA: I am concerned that having the work on this will detract from the work done here in MFWG since there is a large overlap of people.

MIH: I agree with EAO that having this group outside of MFWG would be better for progress. A lot of users of MessageFormant have their own formats and standards, but I think ECMA-402 doesn’t have a standard, so that is fair to design for. However, I think this effort is more natural under ECMA-402. I don’t know how connected they should be, so the more disconnected these groups are, the better it would be.

EAO: I am hearing that only RCA and ECH are opposed to having this Message Resource Group outside of the current MFWG.

ECH: Listening to what MIH said, I do think it is possible to have the group outside of MFWG. My concern was just the possibility that we as a group would go back on previous decisions.

MIH: I think this would be a hard thing to create a universal standard for. There are so many different platform with their own constraints and preferences. If it were done under Unicode, then I would feel compelled to get involved, in order to ensure that any issues I see are brought up and problematic things opposed.

RCA: My thought is also about the impact to the MFWG group. it may be that such a group might belong in a different venue, echoing what MIH and ECH said would be outside of Unicode, or maybe even outside of EMCA-402 too.

EAO: In that case, we seem in general agreement that this message resource group would be outside of the scope of the MFWG, but we are undecided on where such a group would be under. Unless anyone is opposed, I will go ahead and create a repository to collect work for this effort, and we can decide later where this group can live.

## Getting feedback on MessageFormat

MIH: Can we merge the spec that we have in the `develop` branch into `main`? It seems appropriate for the consensus that we already have on it.

EAO: +1.

STA: I agree.

EAO: Also, we should start thinking about advertising the work that we have been making. Now that we have a Tech Preview implementation in ICU4J, we can start announcing publicly that we have it so that we can start soliciting feedback. Maybe we can create a Github issue template.

STA: We have Github issues, but we also have Github discussions. I think if we go out with a preset list of questions, we might skew the answers that we get. In my experience getting feedback, asking a set of questions always interfered with getting the full set of feedback.

## Action items

- Update the README to guide feedback-givers
- Create an issue template for feedback
- Create a guideline about issues vs. discussions
- Merge develop into main
- Update urls in the ICU implementation ([1](https://github.com/unicode-org/icu/pull/2170/files#diff-94843b33f399d329dd530d74a97bdbbcf57d3fa115d17986c92cca03d694e25eR33), [2](https://github.com/unicode-org/icu/pull/2170/files#diff-94843b33f399d329dd530d74a97bdbbcf57d3fa115d17986c92cca03d694e25eR33))
- Write a press release: Press Relase Draft - MF 2.0
- Reach out to the Editors WG to coordinate the comms about the MF TP
- Change the Extended meeting to 1-hour-long weekly touchpoints.
- Next meeting (Sep 26) - checkpoint before the release
- Create a list of follow-up questions to ask after someone reaches out to us with feedback.
- ICU (MIH): release date, stages of a feature + timeline, feedback cycle & how is collected
- The Unicode Conference “replacement”: talk to Shane. What’s the format, pre-recorded videos or discussion panels?
- Start tagging issues with blocker-candidate?
- Cleanup branches (some delete, some rename, tbd)
